Effects of side-chain characteristics on stability and oligomerization state of a de Novo-designed model coiled-coil: 20 amino acid substitutions in position “d”11Edited by P. E. Wright
6701721066,9742432900,19334958900,7003390246,36051435500
α-helical coiled-coil,hydrophobic core substitutions,protein stability,oligomerization states,de novo design
We describe the de novo design and biophysical characterization of a model coiled-coil protein in which we have systematically substituted 20 different amino acid residues in the central “d” position. The model protein consists of two identical 38 residue polypeptide chains covalently linked at their N termini via a disulfide bridge. The hydrophobic core contained Val and Ile residues at positions “a” and Leu residues at positions “d”. This core allowed for the formation of both two-stranded and three-stranded coiled-coils in benign buffer, depending on the substitution at position “d”. The structure of each analog was analyzed by CD spectroscopy and their relative stability determined by chemical denaturation using GdnHCI (all analogs denatured from the two-stranded state). The oligomeric state(s) was determined by high-performance size-exclusion chromatography and sedimentation equilibrium analysis in benign medium. Our results showed a thermodynamic stability order (in order of decreasing stability) of: Leu, Met, Ile, Tyr, Phe, Val, Gln, Ala, Trp, Asn, His, Thr, Lys, Ser, Asp, Glu, Arg, Orn, and Gly. The Pro analog prevented coiled-coil formation. The overall stability range was 7.4 kcal/mol from the lowest to the highest analog, indicating the importance of the hydrophobic core and the dramatic effect a single substitution in the core can have upon the stability of the protein fold. In general, the side-chain contribution to the level of stability correlated with side-chain hydrophobicity. Molecular modelling studies, however, showed that packing effects could explain deviations from a direct correlation. In regards to oligomerization state, eight analogs demonstrated the ability to populate exclusively one oligomerization state in benign buffer (0.1 M KCl, 0.05 M K2PO4(pH 7)). Ile and Val (the β-branched residues) induced the three-stranded oligomerization state, whereas Tyr, Lys, Arg, Orn, Glu and Asp induced the two-stranded state. Asn, Gln, Ser, Ala, Gly, Phe, Leu, Met and Trp analogs were indiscriminate and populated two-stranded and three-stranded states. Comparison of these results with similar substitutions in position “a” highlights the positional effects of individual residues in defining the stability and numbers of polypeptide chains occurring in a coiled-coil structure. Overall, these results in conjunction with other work now generate a relative thermodynamic stability scale for 19 naturally occurring amino acid residues in either an “a” or “d” position of a two-stranded coiled-coil. Thus, these results will aid in the de novo design of new coiled-coil structures, a better understanding of their structure/function relationships and the design of algorithms to predict the presence of coiled-coils within native protein sequences.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228360093866X
00222836