Echinoderm collagen fibrils grow by surface-nucleation-and-propagation from both centers and ends aaEdited by W. Baumeister
7201799115,7005712243,7401994582
collagen,fibril,sea urchin,structure,electron microscopy,growth model
Collagen fibrils from sea cucumber (class Holothuroidea) dermis were previously found to grow by coordinated monomer addition at both centers and ends. This analysis of sea urchin (class Echinoidea) collagen fibrils was undertaken to compare the growth characteristics of fibrils from two classes of echinoderms, and to determine whether a single growth model could account for the main features of fibrils from these two taxa. Native collagen fibrils (37–431 μm long) from the spine ligaments of the sea urchin Eucidaris tribuloides were studied by scanning transmission electron microscopy and image analysis. The analyses revealed the mass per unit length, and hence the number of molecules in cross-section, along the entire length of each fibril. The fibrils were symmetrically spindle shaped. The maximum mass per unit length occurred in the center of each fibril, where the fibril contains anti-parallel molecules in equal numbers. The two pointed tips of each fibril showed similar linear axial mass distributions, indicating that the two tips retain shape and size similarity throughout growth. The linear axial mass distributions showed that the tips were paraboloidal, similar to those of vertebrate and sea cucumber fibrils. The computed maximum diameters of the fibrils increased linearly with fibril length. The overall shapes of the fibrils showed that they retain geometric similarity throughout growth. Computer modeling showed that the simplest self-assembly mechanism that can account for the features of these fibrils, and of the sea cucumber fibrils that have been described, is one in which the fibril tips produce independent axial growth, while lateral growth takes place through a surface nucleation and propagation mechanism. This mechanism produces coordinated growth in length and diameter as well as geometric similarity, characteristic features of echinoderm collagen fibrils.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283600938798
00222836