Nucleosome dynamics.V.† ethidium bromide versus histone tails in modulating ethidium bromide-driven tetrasome chiral transition. A fluorescence study of tetrasomes on DNA minicircles2†Paper IV in this series is Alilat et al. (1999)2Edited by M. Yaniv
6701312188,7004530741
tetrasomes on DNA minicircles,H3 DTNB oxidation,ethidium bromide binding isotherms,DNA overtwisting,histone tails
Protein and DNA contributions in the chiral transition of DNA minicircle-reconstituted tetrasomes (the particles made of DNA wrapped around the histone (H3-H4)2 tetramer) to a right-handed conformation have been investigated in a recent article from this laboratory. As the evidence for a protein contribution, a sterical hindrance introduced at the H3/H3 interface of the two constituent H3-H4 dimers by oxidation of H3 cysteine 110 blocked the tetramer in a half-left-handed or semi-right-handed conformation, depending on the SH-reagent used. The DNA contributed at the level of the dyad region, which appeared to act through its sequence-dependent deformability in modulating both the loop threshold positive constraint required to trigger the transition, and the tetrasome lateral opening. This opening, which electron microscopic visualizations directly showed to be associated with the transition, is expected to help remove the clash between the entering and exiting DNAs. In this work, the transition mechanism was further investigated by applying a positive constraint in the loop through ethidium bromide (EtBr) intercalation. This technique, including the determination of binding isotherms, has first been used with mononucleosomes on DNA minicircles, and has revealed that these particles could tolerate large positive supercoilings without disruption, owing to the loop ability to cross positively in a histone tail-dependent manner. The transition of 359 bp tetrasomes was found to go to completion in lower salt (10 mM), but not in higher salt (100 mM), whereas the transition of 256 bp tetrasomes was already hindered in lower salt. Histone acetylation relieved that lower salt hindrance but enhanced the higher salt hindrances. These data again pointed to the DNA in the dyad region as a regulator of the transition. The block was indeed expected to originate from a local EtBr intercalation in that DNA, which opposed its overtwisting during the transition. The occurrence of the block, or its relief, then depended on the outcome of the competition between the tails and EtBr for binding to that region, that is, on whether the tails could prevent EtBr intercalation before the ongoing transition hampered both bindings. Destabilization of the tails in the course of the transition is documented in an accompanying article through a relaxation study of a 351-366 bp tetrasome series.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283699933016
00222836