Characterization of Heterodimeric Alkaline Phosphatases from Escherichia coli: An Investigation of Intragenic Complementation
7003949711,7404112291,7006063181
intragenic complementation,metal-binding sites,dimeric enzyme
Escherichia coli alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) belongs to a rare group of enzymes that exhibit intragenic complementation. When certain mutant versions of alkaline phosphatase are combined, the resulting heterodimeric enzymes exhibit a higher level of activity than would be expected based upon the relative activities of the parental enzymes. Nine previously identified alkaline phosphatase complementation mutants were re-examined in this work in order to determine a molecular explanation of intragenic complementation in this experimental system. The locations of these mutations were determined by DNA sequence analysis after PCR amplification of the phosphatase-negative phoA gene. Most of the mutations involved ligands to metal-binding sites. Each of the mutant enzymes was re-created by site-specific mutagenesis, expressed, purified, and kinetically characterized. To investigate cooperativity between the two subunits, we analyzed heterodimeric forms of some of the site-specific mutant enzymes. To enable the isolation of the heterodimeric alkaline phosphatase in pure form, the overall charge of one subunit was altered by replacing the C-terminal Lys residue with three Asp residues. This modification had no effect on the kinetic properties of the enzyme. Heterodimeric alkaline phosphatases were created using two methods: (1) in vitro formation by dissociation at acid pH followed by reassociation at slightly alkaline pH conditions in the presence of zinc and magnesium ions; and (2) in vivo expression from a plasmid carrying two different phoA genes. Increases in kcat, as well as a large reduction in the p-nitrophenyl phosphate Km were observed for certain combinations of mutant enzymes. These results suggest that the structural assembly of E. coli alkaline phosphatase into the dimer induces cooperative interactions between the monomers necessary for the formation of the functional form of the holoenzyme.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228360094230X
00222836