Aminoglycoside binding in the major groove of duplex RNA: the thermodynamic and electrostatic forces that govern recognition11Edited by I. Tinoco
36836680800,6603635756,7201420206,6504444749,7006710879,7005918553
aminoglycoside-RNA recognition,binding-induced drug protonation,drug-induced alteration in RNA structure,RNA bending and hydration,isothermal titration calorimetry
We use a combination of spectroscopic, calorimetric, viscometric and computer modeling techniques to characterize the binding of the aminoglycoside antibiotic, tobramycin, to the polymeric RNA duplex, poly(rI)·poly(rC), which exhibits the characteristic A-type conformation that is conserved among natural and synthetic double-helical RNA sequences. Our results reveal the following significant features: (i) CD-detected binding of tobramycin to poly(rI)·poly(rC) reveals an apparent site size of four base-pairs per bound drug molecule; (ii) tobramycin binding enhances the thermal stability of the host poly(rI)·poly(rC) duplex, the extent of which decreases upon increasing in Na+ concentration and/or pH conditions; (iii) the enthalpy of tobramycin-poly(rI)·poly(rC) complexation increases with increasing pH conditions, an observation consistent with binding-induced protonation of one or more drug amino groups; (iv) the affinity of tobramycin for poly(rI)·poly(rC) is sensitive to both pH and Na+ concentration, with increases in pH and/or Na+ concentration resulting in a concomitant reduction in binding affinity. The salt dependence of the tobramycin binding affinity reveals that the drug binds to the host RNA duplex as trication. (v) The thermodynamic driving force for tobramycin-poly(rI)·poly(rC) complexation depends on pH conditions. Specifically, at pH⩽6.0, tobramycin binding is entropy driven, but is enthalpy driven at pH &gt; 6.0. (vi) Viscometric data reveal non-intercalative binding properties when tobramycin complexes with poly(rI)·poly(rC), consistent with a major groove-directed mode of binding. These data also are consistent with a binding-induced reduction in the apparent molecular length of the host RNA duplex. (vii) Computer modeling studies reveal a tobramycin-poly(rI)·poly(rC) complex in which the drug fits snugly at the base of the RNA major groove and is stabilized, at least in part, by an array of hydrogen bonding interactions with both base and backbone atoms of the host RNA. These studies also demonstrate an inability of tobramycin to form a stable low-energy complex with the minor groove of the poly(rI)·poly(rC) duplex. In the aggregate, our results suggest that tobramycin-RNA recognition is dictated and controlled by a broad range of factors that include electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding interactions, drug protonation reactions, and binding-induced alterations in the structure of the host RNA. These modulatory effects on tobramycin-RNA complexation are discussed in terms of their potential importance for the selective recognition of specific RNA structural motifs, such as asymmetric internal loops or hairpin loop-stem junctions, by aminoglycoside antibiotics and their derivatives.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283600936398
00222836