DNA-induced α-helix capping in conserved linker sequences is a determinant of binding affinity in Cys2-His2 zinc fingers11Edited by F. E. Cohen
6701415250,7102413157,7404316832
NMR,conserved TGEKP linker,Wilms’ tumor,TFIIIA,DNA binding
High-affinity, sequence-specific DNA binding by Cys2-His2 zinc finger proteins is mediated by both specific protein-base interactions and non-specific contacts between charged side-chains and the phosphate backbone. In addition, in DNA complexes of multiple zinc fingers, protein-protein interactions between the finger units contribute to the binding affinity. We present NMR evidence for another contribution to high-affinity binding, a highly specific DNA-induced helix capping involving residues in the linker sequence between fingers. Capping at the C terminus of the α-helix in each zinc finger, incorporating a consensus TGEKP linker sequence that follows each finger, provides substantial binding energy to the DNA complexes of zinc fingers 1–3 of TFIIIA (zf1–3) and the four zinc fingers of the Wilms’ tumor suppressor protein (wt1–4). The same α-helix C-capping motif is observed in the X-ray structures of four other protein-DNA complexes. The structures of each of the TGEKP linkers in these complexes can be superimposed on the linker sequences in the zf1–3 complex, revealing a remarkable similarity in both backbone and side-chain conformations. The canonical linker structures from the zinc-finger-DNA complexes have been compared to the NMR structure of the TGEKP linker connecting fingers 1 and 2 in zf1–3 in the absence of DNA. This comparison reveals that additional stabilization likely arises in the DNA complexes from hydrogen bonding between the backbone amide of E3 and the side-chain Oγ of T1 in the linker. We suggest that these DNA-induced C-capping interactions provide a means whereby the multiple-finger complex, which must necessarily be domain-flexible in the unbound state as it searches for the correct DNA sequence, can be “snap-locked” in place once the correct DNA sequence is encountered. These observations provide a rationale for the high conservation of the TGEKP linker sequences in Cys2-His2 zinc finger proteins.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228369993406X
00222836