Fluorescence energy transfer indicates similar transient and equilibrium intermediates in staphylococcal nuclease folding11Edited by C. R. Matthews
36721184900,36524070500,7005196783,7202322400
protein folding,partially folded intermediates,stopped-flow kinetics,hydrophobic collapse,protein compactness
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) is one of the few methods available to measure the rate at which a folding protein collapses. Using staphylococcal nuclease in which a cysteine residue was engineered in place of Lys64, permitted FRET measurements of the distance between the donor tryptophan 140 and 5-[[2-[(iodoacetyl)-amino]ethyl]amino]naphthalene-1-sulfonic acid-labeled Cys64. These measurements were undertaken on both equilibrium partially folded intermediates at low pH (A states), as well as transient intermediates during stopped-flow refolding. The results indicate that there is an initial collapse of the protein in the deadtime of the stopped-flow instrument, corresponding to a regain of ∼60 % of the native signal, followed by three slower transients. This is in contrast to circular dichroism measurements which show only 20–25 % regain of the native secondary structure in the burst phase. Thus hydrophobic collapse precedes the formation of substantial secondary structure. The first two detected transient intermediate species have FRET properties essentially identical with those of the previously characterized equilibrium A state intermediates, suggesting similar structures between the equilibrium and transient intermediates.The effects of anions on the folding of acid-unfolded staphylococcal nuclease, and urea on the unfolding of the resulting A states, indicates that in folding the protein becomes compact prior to formation of major secondary structure, whereas in unfolding the protein expands prior to major loss of secondary structure. Comparison of the kinetics of refolding of staphylococcal nuclease, monitored by FRET, and for a proline-free variant, indicate that folding occurs via two partially folded intermediates leading to a native-like species with one (or more) proline residues in a non-native conformation. For the A states an excellent correlation between compactness measured by FRET, and compactness determined from small-angle X-ray scattering, was observed. Further, a linear relationship between compactness and free energy of unfolding was noted. Formation of soluble aggregates of the A states led to dramatic enhancement of the FRET, consistent with intermolecular fluorescence energy transfer.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228360093804X
00222836