Homodimeric peptides displayed by the major coat protein of filamentous phage11Edited by I. A. Wilson
8105899100,7404929545,7407334379
pVIII,major coat protein,phage display,homodimer,disulfide bridge
Peptide libraries displayed by filamentous bacteriophage have proven a powerful tool for the discovery of novel peptide agonists, antagonists and epitope mimics. Most phage-displayed peptides are fused to the N terminus of either the minor coat protein, pIII, or the major coat protein, pVIII. We report here that peptides containing cysteine residues, displayed as N-terminal fusions to pVIII, can form disulfide-bridged homodimers on the phage coat. Phage clones were randomly selected from libraries containing one or two fixed Cys residues, and surveyed for the presence of peptide-pVIII homodimers by SDS-PAGE analysis that involved pretreatment of the phage with reducing or thiol-modifying agents. For all phage whose recombinant peptide contained a single Cys residue, a significant fraction of the peptide-pVIII molecules were displayed as dimers on the phage coat. The dimeric form was in greater abundance than the monomer in almost all cases in which both forms could be reliably observed. Occasionally, peptides containing two Cys residues also formed dimers. These results indicate that, for a given pVIII-displayed peptide bearing a single Cys residue, a significant fraction of the peptide (&gt;40 %) will dimerize regardless of its sequence; however, sequence constraints probably determine whether all of the peptide will dimerize. Similarly, only occasionally do peptides bearing two Cys residues form intermolecular disulfide bridges instead of intramolecular ones; this indicates that sequence constraints may also determine dimerization versus cyclization. Sucrose-gradient analysis of membranes from cells expressing pVIII fused to a peptide containing a single Cys residue showed that dimeric pVIII is present in the cell prior to its assembly onto phage. A model of the peptide-pVIII homodimer is discussed in light of existing models of the structure and assembly of the phage coat. The unique secondary structures created by the covalent association of peptides on the phage surface suggest a role for homo- and heterodimeric peptide libraries as novel sources of bioactive peptides.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283600938506
00222836