Origin of apparent fast and non-exponential kinetics of lysozyme folding measured in pulsed hydrogen exchange experiments11Edited by C. R. Matthews
8840544500,56249762100
protein folding,hydrogen/deuterium exchange,folding intermediates,lysozyme,non-exponential kinetics
Folding of lysozyme at pH 5.2 is a complex processes. After rapid collapse (&lt;1 ms) kinetic partitioning into a slow and fast folding pathway occurs. The fast pathway leads directly to the native structure (N), whereas the slow pathway goes through a partially folded intermediate (I1) with native-like secondary structure in the α-domain. This mechanism is in agreement with data from a large number of spectroscopic probes, from changes in the radius of gyration and from measurements on the time-course of the populations of the different species. Results from pulsed hydrogen exchange experiments, in contrast, revealed that the secondary structure of I1 and of N is formed significantly faster than changes in spectroscopic properties occur and showed large variations in the protection kinetics of individual amide sites. We investigated the molecular origin of the rapid amide protection by quantitatively simulating all kinetic processes during the pulse-labeling experiments. Absorbance and fluorescence-detected folding kinetics showed that the early events in lysozyme folding are accelerated under exchange conditions (pH 9.2) and that a change in folding mechanism occurs due to the transient population of an additional intermediate (I2). This leads to kinetic competition between exchange and folding during the exchange pulse and to incomplete labeling of amide sites with slow intrinsic exchange rates. As a result, apparently faster and non-exponential kinetics of amide protection are measured in the labeling experiments. Our results further suggest that collapsed lysozyme (C) and I1 have five and ten-times reduced free exchange rates, respectively, due to limited solvent accessibility.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601948041
00222836