Are trigger sequences essential in the folding of two-stranded α-helical coiled-coils?11Edited by C. R. Matthews
7406664150,19334958900,36051435500
coiled-coil,protein folding,protein stability,cortexillin,GCN4
The amino acid residues comprising the interface between strands of the coiled-coil motif are usually hydrophobic and make a major contribution to coiled-coil folding and stability. However, in some cases the presence of excellent hydrophobic residues at the coiled-coil interface is insufficient for folding. It has been proposed that a “consensus trigger sequence” exists that is necessary within the coiled-coil domains of various proteins to trigger folding. Therefore, in this study we designed a 31-residue hybrid sequence based on sequences from the two-stranded parallel coiled-coil domains of the yeast transcriptional activator GCN4 and the actin-bundling protein Dictyostelium discoideum cortexillin I. The hybrid and its analogs were studied by CD spectroscopy and analytical ultracentrifugation. The hybrid had stable residues in the core “a” and “d” positions in the 3–4 hydrophobic repeat, denoted (abcdefg)n, but did not have a consensus trigger sequence and did not possess appreciable secondary structure as determined by CD spectroscopy. The substitutions in the parent peptide were introduced at positions other than “a” and “d”, altering a variety of interactions including α-helical propensity, interchain and intrachain electrostatics, and hydrophobicity. Although the substitutions did not bring the overall sequence in closer agreement to the consensus trigger sequence, they increased coiled-coil folding and stability. Therefore, our results suggest that the combination of stabilizing effects along a protein sequence is a more general indicator of protein folding in coiled-coils than the identification of a specific trigger sequence. We propose that surpassing a critical threshold stability value using any type or combination of stabilizing effects will allow coiled-coils to fold, in the absence of a specific trigger sequence per se.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283600943511
00222836