Mutational analysis of hydrogen bonding residues in the BPTI folding pathway11Edited by C. R. Matthews
6701866315,7201763411
protein folding,bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor,hydrogen bonds,disulfide bonds
Nine BPTI variants with replacements that remove one or more hydrogen bonds from the native protein were constructed, and the folding pathways of these proteins were determined by isolating and identifying the disulfide-bonded intermediates that accumulated during unfolding and refolding. The forward and reverse rate constants for the individual steps in the folding pathways for each protein were measured, providing a detailed description of the energetic effects of the substitutions. The native forms of eight of the nine variants were measurably destabilized, by 1–7 kcal/mol (1 cal = 4.184 J), with an average effect of 1.6 kcal/mol per hydrogen bond removed. The folding pathways for the variants were found to be similar to that previously described for the wild-type protein, with the kinetically preferred mechanism involving intramolecular rearrangements of intermediates with two disulfide bonds. Some of the substitutions, however, significantly destabilized the major intermediates and broadened the distribution of species with one or two disulfide bonds, thus identifying residues that play important roles in stabilizing the normal intermediates and defining specificity in the folding process. The kinetic data also suggest that one residue, Asn43, may play a distinctive role in defining the BPTI folding mechanism. Replacement of this residue with either Gly or Ala appeared to stabilize the major transition states for folding and unfolding. In the native protein, the side-chain of Asn43 participates directly in the hydrogen bonding pattern of the central β-sheet, and the kinetic behavior of the Asn43 variants suggests that the major energy barriers in folding and unfolding may be due in part to the steric constraints imposed by this structural element, together with those imposed by the chemical transition states for thiol-disulfide exchange.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601950466
00222836