Dissection of the ATP-driven reaction cycle of the bacteriophage T4 DNA replication processivity clamp loading system11Edited by R. Ebright
7003914537,7404193964,35910276000,7005523492
DNA replication,polymerase accessory proteins,ATPase,presteady-state kinetics,ATPase reaction cycles
Processive DNA replication requires the loading of a multisubunit ring-shaped protein complex, known as a sliding or processivity clamp, onto the primer-template (p/t) DNA. This clamp then binds to the replication polymerase to form a processive polymerase holoenzyme. The processivity of the holoenzyme derives from the topological properties of the clamp, which encircles the DNA without actually binding to it. Multisubunit complexes known as clamp-loaders utilize ATP to drive the placement of this ring around the DNA. To further understand the role of ATP binding and hydrolysis in driving clamp-loading in the DNA replication system of bacteriophage T4, we report the results of a series of presteady-state and steady-state kinetic ATPase experiments involving the various components of the reconstituted system. The results obtained are consistent with a mechanism in which a slow step, which involves the binary ATP-bound clamp-clamp loader complex, activates this complex and permits p/t DNA to bind and stimulate ATP hydrolysis. ATP hydrolysis itself, as well as the subsequent (after clamp-loading) dissociation of the clamp-loader and the slippage of the loaded clamp from the p/t DNA construct, are shown to be fast steps. A second slow step occurs after ATP hydrolysis. This step involves the dissociated clamp loader complex and may reflect ADP release. Only one molecule of ATP is hydrolyzed per clamp-loading event. Rate constants for each step, and an overall reaction mechanism for the T4 clamp-loading system, are derived from these data and from other results in the literature. The principles that emerge fit into a general framework that can apply to many biological processes involving ATP-driven reaction cycles.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228360194687X
00222836