Volume, expansivity and isothermal compressibility changes associated with temperature and pressure unfolding of staphylococcal nuclease11Edited by C. R. Mathews
6701684559,56004686700,7005785297
staphylococcal nuclease,unfolding,specific volume,expansion coefficient,isothermal compressibility
We have characterized the temperature- and pressure-induced unfolding of staphylococcal nuclease (Snase) using high precision densitometric measurements. The changes in the apparent specific volume, expansion coefficient and isothermal compressibility were determined by these measurements. To our knowledge, these are the first measurements of the volume and isothermal compressibility changes of a protein undergoing pressure-induced unfolding. In order to aid in interpreting the temperature and pressure dependence of the apparent specific volume of Snase, we have also carried out differential scanning calorimetry under the solution conditions which are used for the volumetric studies. We have seen that large compensating volume and compressibility effects accompany the temperature and pressure-induced protein unfolding. Measurements of the apparent specific volume and thermal expansion coefficient of Snase at ambient pressure indicate the formation of a pre-transitional, molten globule type of intermediate structure about 10°C below the actual unfolding temperature of the protein. Compared to the folded state, the apparent specific volume of the unfolded protein is about 0.3-0.5 % smaller. In addition, we investigated the pressure dependence of the apparent specific volume of Snase at a number of different temperatures. At 45°C we calculate a decrease in apparent specific volume due to pressure-induced unfolding of −3.3 10−3 cm3 g−1 or −55 cm3 mol−1. The threefold increase in compressibility between 40 and 70 MPa reflects a transition to a partially unfolded state, which is consistent with our results obtained for the radius of gyration of the pressure-denatured state of Snase. At the lower temperature of 35°C, a significant increase in compressibility around 30 MPa is indicative of the formation of a pressure-induced molten globule-like intermediate. Changes in the apparent volume, expansion coefficient and isothermal compressibility are discussed in terms of instrinsic, hydrational and thermal contributions accompanying the unfolding transition.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601945176
00222836