Rough energy landscapes in protein folding: dimeric E. coliTrp repressor folds through three parallel channels11Edited by P. E. Wright
6603731774,15736320800,56235307600
circular dichroism,fluorescence,kinetics,helix-turn-helix
The folding mechanism of the dimeric Escherichia coli Trp repressor (TR) is a kinetically complex process that involves three distinguishable stages of development. Following the formation of a partially folded, monomeric ensemble of species, within 5 ms, folding to the native dimer is controlled by three kinetic phases. The rate-limiting step in each phase is either a non-proline isomerization reaction or a dimerization reaction, depending on the final denaturant concentration. Two approaches have been employed to test the previously proposed folding mechanism of TR through three parallel channels: (1) unfolding double-jump experiments demonstrate that all three folding channels lead directly to native dimer; and (2) the differential stabilization of the transition state for the final step in folding and the native dimer, by the addition of salt, shows that all three channels involve isomerization of a dimeric species. A refined model for the folding of Trp repressor is presented, in which all three channels involve a rapid dimerization reaction between partially folded monomers followed by the isomerization of the dimeric intermediates to yield native dimer. The ensemble of partially folded monomers can be captured at equilibrium by low pH; one-dimensional proton NMR spectra at pH 2.5 demonstrate that monomers exist in two distinct, slowly interconverting conformations. These data provide a potential structural explanation for the three-channel folding mechanism of TR: random association of two different monomeric forms, which are distinguished by alternative packing modes of the core dimerization domain and the DNA-binding, helix-turn-helix, domain. One, perhaps both, of these packing modes contains non-native contacts.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601949745
00222836