Membrane Integrity and Amyloid Cytotoxicity: A Model Study Involving Mitochondria and Lysozyme Fibrillation Products
26422423200,16238929300,55666021500
hen egg white lysozyme,mitochondria,membrane permeabilization,protofibrils,cytotoxicity
Recent findings implicate that fibrillation products, the protein aggregates formed during the various steps leading to formation of mature fibrils, induce neurotoxicity predominantly in their intermediate oligomeric state. This has been shown to occur by increasing membrane permeability, eventually leading to cell death. Despite accumulating reports describing mechanisms of membrane permeabilization by oligomers in model membranes, studies directly targeted at characterizing the events occurring in biological membranes are rare. In the present report, we describe interaction of the original native structure, prefibrils and fibrils of hen egg white lysozyme (HEWL) with mitochondrial membranes, as an in vitro biological model, with the aim of gaining insight into possible mechanism of cytotoxicity at the membrane level. These structures were first characterized using a range of techniques, including fluorescence, size-exclusion chromatography, dynamic light scattering, transmission electron microscopy, dot blot analysis and circular dichroism. HEWL oligomers were found to be flexible/hydrophobic structures with the capacity to interact with mitochondrial membranes. Possible permeabilization of mitochondria was explored utilizing sensitive fluorometric and luminometric assays. Results presented demonstrate release of mitochondrial enzymes upon exposure to HEWL oligomers, but not native enzyme monomer or mature fibrils, in a concentration-dependent manner. Release of cytochrome c was also observed, as reported earlier, and membrane stabilization promoted by addition of calcium prevented release. Moreover, the oligomer–membrane interaction was influenced by high concentrations of NaCl and spermine. The observed release of proteins from mitochondria is suggested to occur by a nonspecific perturbation mechanism.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283611004748
00222836