Dynamics of Mutation and Recombination in a Replicating Population of Complementing, Defective Viral Genomes
6506905296,14030338900,7005656624,7102252388,7003921513
genome segmentation,defective genomes,virus evolution,recombination cross-over sites,foot-and-mouth disease virus
In a previous study, we documented that serial passage of a biological clone of foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) at high multiplicity of infection (moi) in cell culture resulted in viral populations dominated by defective genomes that included internal in-frame deletions, affecting the L and capsid-coding regions, and were infectious by complementation. In the present study, analyses of the defective genomes present in individual viral plaques, and of consensus nucleotide sequences determined for the entire genomes of sequential samples, have revealed a continuous dynamics of mutation and recombination. At some points of high genetic instability, multiple minority genomes with different internal deletions co-existed in the population. At later passages, a new defective RNA arose and displaced a related, previously dominant RNA. Nucleotide sequences of the different genomic forms found in sequential isolates have revealed an accumulation of mutations at an average rate of 0.12 substitutions per genome per passage. At the regions around the deletion sites, substantial, minor or no nucleotide sequence identity is found, suggesting relaxed sequence requirements for the occurrence of internal deletions. Competition experiments indicate a selective advantage of late phase defective genomes over their precursor forms. The defective genome-based FMDV retained an expansion of host cell tropism, undergone by the standard virus at a previous stage of the same evolutionary lineage. Thus, despite a complex dynamics of mutation and recombination, and phases of high genetic instability, a biologically relevant phenotypic trait was stably maintained after the evolutionary transition towards a primitive genome segmentation. The results extend the concept of a complex spectrum of mutant genomes to a complex spectrum of defective genomes in some evolutionary transitions of RNA viruses.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283606006097
00222836