Massive Sequence Perturbation of the Raf ras Binding Domain Reveals Relationships between Sequence Conservation, Secondary Structure Propensity, Hydrophobic Core Organization and Stability
6506921124,14013881900,7003919112
Raf ras binding domain,β-grasp ubiquitin-like topology,sequence entropy,core volume,secondary structure propensity
The contributions of specific residues to the delicate balance between function, stability and folding rates could be determined, in part comparing the sequences of structures having identical folds, but insignificant sequence homology. Recently, we have devised an experimental strategy to thoroughly explore residue substitutions consistent with a specific class of structure. Using this approach, the amino acids tolerated at virtually all residues of the c-Raf/Raf1 ras binding domain (Raf RBD), an exemplar of the common β-grasp ubiquitin-like topology, were obtained and used to define the sequence determinants of this fold. Herein, we present analyses suggesting that more subtle sequence selection pressure, including propensity for secondary structure, the hydrophobic core organization and charge distribution are imposed on the Raf RBD sequence. Secondly, using the Gibbs free energies (ΔGF-U) obtained for 51 mutants of Raf RBD, we demonstrate a strong correlation between amino acid conservation and the destabilization induced by truncating mutants. In addition, four mutants are shown to significantly stabilize Raf RBD native structure. Two of these mutations, including the well-studied R89L, are known to severely compromise binding affinity for ras. Another stabilized mutant consisted of a deletion of amino acid residues E104−K106. This deletion naturally occurs in the homologues a-Raf and b-Raf and could indicate functional divergence. Finally, the combination of mutations affecting five of 78 residues of Raf RBD results in stabilization of the structure by approximately 12 kJ mol−1 (ΔGF-U is −22 and −34 kJ mol−1 for wt and mutant, respectively). The sequence perturbation approach combined with sequence/structure analysis of the ubiquitin-like fold provide a basis for the identification of sequence-specific requirements for function, stability and folding rate of the Raf RBD and structural analogues, highlighting the utility of conservation profiles as predictive tools of structural organization.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283606008035
00222836