Flexibility and Adaptability in Binding of E. coli Cytidine Repressor to Different Operators Suggests a Role in Differential Gene Regulation
6508248465,7005213245,7004103759
protein−DNA interaction,thermodynamics,van't Hoff analysis,operator sequences,repressors
Interactions between DNA-bound transcription factors CytR and CRP regulate the promoters of the Escherichia coli CytR regulon. A distinctive feature of the palindromic CytR operators is highly variable length central spacers (0−9 bp). Previously we demonstrated distinct modes of CytR binding to operators that differ in spacer length. These different modes are characterized by opposite enthalpic and entropic contributions at 25 °C. Of particular note were radically different negative ΔCp values suggesting variable contribution from coupled protein folding and/or DNA structural transitions. We proposed that the CytR DNA binding-domain adopts either a more rigid or flexible DNA-bound conformation in response to the different spacer lengths. More recently, similar effects were shown to contribute to discrimination between operator and non-specific DNA binding by LacR, a CytR homolog. Here we have extended the thermodynamic analysis to the remaining natural CytR operators plus a set of synthetic operators designed to isolate spacing as the single variable. The thermodynamic results show a broad and monotonic range of effects that are primarily dependent on spacer length. The magnitude of effects suggests participation by more than the DNA-binding domain. 15N HSQC NMR and CD spectral analyses were employed to characterize the structural basis for these effects. The results indicate that while CytR forms a well-ordered structure in solution, it is highly dynamic. We propose a model in which a large ensemble of native state conformations narrows upon binding, to an extent governed by operator spacing. This in turn is expected to constrain intermolecular interactions in the CytR-CRP-DNA complex, thus generating operator-specific effects on repression and induction of transcription.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283606008254
00222836