Probing the Electrostatics and Pharmacological Modulation of Sequence-Specific Binding by the DNA-Binding Domain of the ETS Family Transcription Factor PU.1: A Binding Affinity and Kinetics Investigation
16302124600,7005841015,35402558500
ETS transcription factors,PU.1,protein–DNA interactions,surface plasmon resonance,transcription factor inhibition
Members of the ETS family of transcription factors regulate a functionally diverse array of genes. All ETS proteins share a structurally conserved but sequence-divergent DNA-binding domain, known as the ETS domain. Although the structure and thermodynamics of the ETS–DNA complexes are well known, little is known about the kinetics of sequence recognition, a facet that offers potential insight into its molecular mechanism. We have characterized DNA binding by the ETS domain of PU.1 by biosensor-surface plasmon resonance (SPR). SPR analysis revealed a striking kinetic profile for DNA binding by the PU.1 ETS domain. At low salt concentrations, it binds high-affinity cognate DNA with a very slow association rate constant (≤105M−1s−1), compensated by a correspondingly small dissociation rate constant. The kinetics are strongly salt dependent but mutually balance to produce a relatively weak dependence in the equilibrium constant. This profile contrasts sharply with reported data for other ETS domains (e.g., Ets-1, TEL) for which high-affinity binding is driven by rapid association (&gt;107M−1s−1). We interpret this difference in terms of the hydration properties of ETS–DNA binding and propose that at least two mechanisms of sequence recognition are employed by this family of DNA-binding domain. Additionally, we use SPR to demonstrate the potential for pharmacological inhibition of sequence-specific ETS–DNA binding, using the minor groove-binding distamycin as a model compound. Our work establishes SPR as a valuable technique for extending our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of ETS–DNA interactions as well as developing potential small-molecule agents for biotechnological and therapeutic purposes.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228361300096X
00222836