Solving the Structure of PTB in Complex with Pyrimidine Tracts: An NMR Study of Protein–RNA Complexes of Weak Affinities†
8941946500,8941947500,6603685405
polypyrimidine tract-binding protein (PTB),nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),RNA-binding domain (RBD, RRM, RNP),protein–nucleic acid complex,dissociation constant (KD)
NMR spectroscopy has proven to be a powerful tool for the structure determination of protein/RNA complexes. However, the quality of these structures depends critically on the number of unambiguous intermolecular and intra-RNA nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) constraints that can be derived. This number is often limited due to exchange phenomena that can cause signal line broadening and the fact that unambiguous NOE assignments are challenging in systems that exchange between different conformations in the intermediate to fast exchange limit. These exchange processes can include exchange between free and bound form, as well as exchange of the ligand between different binding sites on the protein. Furthermore, for the large class of RNA metabolizing proteins that bind repetitive low-complexity RNA sequences in multiple register, exchange of the protein between these overlapping binding sites introduces additional exchange pathways. Here, we describe the strategy we used to overcome these exchange processes and to reduce significantly the line width of the RNA resonances in complexes of the RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) of the polypyrimidine tract-binding protein (PTB) in complex with pyrimidine tracts and hence allowed a highly precise structure determination. This method could be employed to derive structures of other protein/single-stranded nucleic acid complexes by NMR spectroscopy. Furthermore, we have determined the affinities of the individual RRMs of PTB for pyrimidine tracts of different length and sequence. These measurements show that PTB binds preferentially to long pyrimidine tracts that contain cytosine and hence confirm the structure of PTB in complex with RNA. Furthermore, they provide quantitative insight into the question of which pyrimidine sequences within alternatively spliced pre-mRNAs will be preferentially bound by PTB.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228360601744X
00222836