Role of the Charge–Charge Interactions in Defining Stability and Halophilicity of the CspB Proteins
6506665174,7006677598
protein stability,protein halophilicity,charge–charge interactions,computational modeling,amino acid substitutions
Charge–charge interactions on the surface of native proteins are important for protein stability and can be computationally redesigned in a rational way to modulate protein stability. Such computational effort led to an engineered protein, CspB-TB that has the same core as the mesophilic cold shock protein CspB-Bs from Bacillus subtilis, but optimized distribution of charge–charge interactions on the surface. The CspB-TB protein shows an increase in the transition temperature by 20 °C relative to the unfolding temperature of CspB-Bs. The CspB-TB and CspB-Bs protein pair offers a unique opportunity to further explore the energetics of charge–charge interactions as the substitutions at the same sequence positions are done in largely similar structural but different electrostatic environments. In particular we addressed two questions. What is the contribution of charge–charge interactions in the unfolded state to the protein stability and how amino acid substitutions modulate the effect of increase in ionic strength on protein stability (i.e. protein halophilicity). To this end, we experimentally measured the stabilities of over 100 variants of CspB-TB and CspB-Bs proteins with substitutions at charged residues. We also performed computational modeling of these protein variants. Analysis of the experimental and computational data allowed us to conclude that the charge–charge interactions in the unfolded state of two model proteins CspB-Bs and CspB-TB are not very significant and computational models that are based only on the native state structure can adequately, i.e. qualitatively (stabilizing versus destabilizing) and semi-quantitatively (relative rank order), predict the effects of surface charge neutralization or reversal on protein stability. We also show that the effect of ionic strength on protein stability (protein halophilicity) appears to be mainly due to the screening of the long-range charge–charge interactions.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283606016081
00222836