Structure and Action of a CC Bond Cleaving α/β-Hydrolase Involved in Nicotine Degration
6504097703,10039425500,7005986022,35480103800
catalytic triad,meta-cleavage pathway,retro-Friedel-Crafts acylation,site-directed mutagenesis,X-ray diffraction analysis
The enzyme 2,6-dihydroxy-pseudo-oxynicotine hydrolase from the nicotine-degradation pathway of Arthrobacter nicotinovorans was crystallized and the structure was determined by an X-ray diffraction analysis at 2.1 Å resolution. The enzyme belongs to the α/β-hydrolase family as derived from the chain-fold and from the presence of a catalytic triad with its oxyanion hole at the common position. This relationship assigns a pocket lined by the catalytic triad as the active center. The asymmetric unit contains two C2-symmetric dimer molecules, each adopting a specific conformation. One dimer forms a more spacious active center pocket and the other a smaller one, suggesting an induced-fit. All of the currently established C–C bond cleaving α/β-hydrolases are from bacterial meta-cleavage pathways for the degradation of aromatic compounds and cover their active center with a 40 residue lid placed between two adjacent strands of the β-sheet. In contrast, the reported enzyme shields its active center with a 110 residue N-terminal domain, which is absent in the meta-cleavage hydrolases. Since neither the substrate nor an analogue could be bound in the crystals, the substrate was modeled into the active center using the oxyanion hole as a geometric constraint. The model was supported by enzymatic activity data of 11 point mutants and by the two dimer conformations suggesting an induced-fit. Moreover, the model assigned a major role for the large N-terminal domain that is specific to the reported enzyme. The proposal is consistent with the known data for the meta-cleavage hydrolases although it differs in that the reaction does not release alkenes but a hetero-aromatic compound in a retro-Friedel-Crafts acylation. Because the hydrolytic water molecule can be assigned to a geometrically suitable site that can be occupied in the presence of the substrate, the catalytic triad may not form a covalent acyl-enzyme intermediate but merely support a direct hydrolysis.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228360601758X
00222836