A Comparison of the Folding of Two Knotted Proteins: YbeA and YibK
6506743630,7402695451
topological knot,protein folding,chevron plot,global analysis,dimer kinetics
The extraordinary topology of proteins belonging to the α/β-knot superfamily of proteins is unexpected, due to the apparent complexities involved in the formation of a deep trefoil knot in a polypeptide backbone. Despite this, an increasing number of knotted structures are being identified; how such proteins fold remains a mystery. Studies on the dimeric protein YibK from Haemophilus influenzae have led to the characterisation of its folding pathway in some detail. To complement research into the folding of YibK, and to address whether folding pathways are conserved for members of the α/β-knot superfamily, the structurally similar knotted protein YbeA from Escherichia coli has been studied. A comprehensive thermodynamic and kinetic analysis of the folding of YbeA is presented here, and compared to that of YibK. Both fold via an intermediate state populated under equilibrium conditions that is monomeric and considerably structured. The unfolding/refolding kinetics of YbeA are simpler than those found for YibK and involve two phases attributed to the formation of a monomeric intermediate state and a dimerisation step. In contrast to YibK, a change in the rate-determining step on the unfolding pathway for YbeA is observed with a changing concentration of urea. Despite this difference, both proteins fold by a mechanism involving at least one sequential monomeric intermediate that has properties similar to that observed during the equilibrium unfolding. The rate of dimerisation observed for YbeA and YibK is very similar, as is the rate constant for formation of the kinetic monomeric intermediate that precedes dimerisation. The findings suggest that relatively slow folding and dimerisation may be common attributes of knotted proteins.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283606015439
00222836