Mechanism of Formation of Amyloid Protofibrils of Barstar from Soluble Oligomers: Evidence for Multiple Steps and Lateral Association Coupled to Conformational Conversion
56081938700,56261354100,35563592100
barstar,amyloid protofibrils,soluble oligomers,lateral association,multiple pathways
Understanding the heterogeneity of the soluble oligomers and protofibrillar structures that form initially during the process of amyloid fibril formation is a critical aspect of elucidating the mechanism of amyloid fibril formation by proteins. The small protein barstar offers itself as a good model protein for understanding this aspect of amyloid fibril formation, because it forms a stable soluble oligomer, the A form, at low pH, which can transform into protofibrils. The mechanism of formation of protofibrils from soluble oligomer has been studied by multiple structural probes, including binding to the fluorescent dye thioflavin T, circular dichroism and dynamic light scattering, and at different temperatures and different protein concentrations. The kinetics of the increase in any probe signal are single exponential, and the rate measured depends on the structural probe used to monitor the reaction. Fastest is the rate of increase in the mean hydrodynamic radius, which grows from a value of 6 nm for the A form to 20 nm for the protofibril. Slower is the rate of increase in thioflavin T binding capacity, and slowest is the rate of increase in circular dichroism at 216 nm, which occurs at about the same rate as that of the increase in light scattering intensity. The dynamic light scattering measurements suggest that the A form transforms completely into larger size aggregates at an early stage during the aggregation process. It appears that structural changes within the aggregates occur at the late stages of assembly into protofibrils. For all probes, and at all temperatures, no initial lag phase in protofibril growth is observed for protein concentrations in the range of 1 μM to 50 μM. The absence of a lag phase in the increase of any probe signal suggests that aggregation of the A form to protofibrils is not nucleation dependent. In addition, the absence of a lag phase in the increase of light scattering intensity, which changes the slowest, suggests that protofibril formation occurs through more than one pathway. The rate of aggregation increases with increasing protein concentration, but saturates at high concentrations. An analysis of the dependence of the apparent rates of protofibril formation, determined by the four structural probes, indicates that the slowest step during protofibil formation is lateral association of linear aggregates. Conformational conversion occurs concurrently with lateral association, and does so in two steps leading to the creation of thioflavin T binding sites and then to an increase in β-sheet structure. Overall, the study indicates that growth during protofibril formation occurs step-wise through progressively larger and larger aggregates, via multiple pathways, and finally through lateral association of critical aggregates.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283607000794
00222836