Fatty Acids can Substitute the HIV Fusion Peptide in Lipid Merging and Fusion: An Analogy between Viral and Palmitoylated Eukaryotic Fusion Proteins
22935220600,7006584926
membrane fusion,peptide–lipid interaction,HIV-1 gp41,AFM,fusion peptide
Various fusion proteins from eukaryotes and viruses share structural similarities such as a coiled coil motif. However, compared with eukaryotic proteins, a viral fusion protein contains a fusion peptide (FP), which is an N-terminal hydrophobic fragment that is primarily involved in directing fusion via anchoring the protein to the target cell membrane. In various eukaryotic fusion proteins the membrane targeting domain is cysteine-rich and must undergo palmitoylation prior to the fusion process. Here we examined whether fatty acids can replace the FP of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), thereby discerning between the contributions of the sequence versus hydrophobicity of the FP in the lipid-merging process. For that purpose, we structurally and functionally characterized peptides derived from the N terminus of HIV fusion protein - gp41 in which the FP is lacking or replaced by fatty acids. We found that fatty acid conjugation dramatically enhanced the capability of the peptides to induce lipid mixing and aggregation of zwitterionic phospholipids composing the outer leaflet of eukaryotic cell membranes. The enhanced effect of the acylated peptides on membranes was further supported by real-time atomic force microscopy (AFM) showing nanoscale holes in zwitterionic membranes. Membrane-binding experiments revealed that fatty acid conjugation did not increase the affinity of the peptides to the membrane significantly. Furthermore, all free and acylated peptides exhibited similar α-helical structures in solution and in zwitterionic membranes. Interestingly, the fusogenic active conformation of N36 in negatively charged membranes composing the inner leaflet of eukaryotic cells is β-sheet. Apparently, N-terminal heptad repeat (NHR) can change its conformation as a response to a change in the charge of the membrane head group. Overall, the data suggest an analogy between the eukaryotic cysteine-rich domains and the viral fusion peptide, and mark the hydrophobic nature of FP as an important characteristic for its role in lipid merging.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283607011825
00222836