Cooperative Unfolding of a Metastable Serpin to a Molten Globule Suggests a Link Between Functional and Folding Energy Landscapes
13905145500,6603267728
α1, antitrypsin,serpin,hydrogen-deuterium exchange,mass spectrometry,equilibrium unfolding energy landscape
Alpha-1 antitrypsin (α1-AT) is a member of the serpin class of protease inhibitors, and folds to a metastable state rather than its thermodynamically most stable native state. Upon cleavage by a target protease, α1-AT undergoes a dramatic conformational change to a stable form, translocating the bound protease more than 70 Å to form an inhibitory protease–serpin complex. Numerous mutagenesis studies on serpins have demonstrated the trade-off between the stability of the metastable state on the one hand and the inhibitory efficiency on the other. Studies of the equilibrium unfolding of serpins provide insight into this connection between structural plasticity and metastability. We studied equilibrium unfolding of wild-type α1-AT using hydrogen-deuterium/exchange mass spectrometry to characterize the structure and the stability of an equilibrium intermediate that was observed in low concentrations of denaturant in earlier studies. Our results show that the intermediate observed at low concentrations of denaturant has no protection from hydrogen-deuterium exchange, indicating a lack of stable structure. Further, differential scanning calorimetry of α1-AT at low concentrations of denaturant shows no heat capacity peak during thermal denaturation, indicating that the transition from the intermediate to the unfolded state is not a cooperative first-order-like phase transition.. Our results show that the unfolding of α1-AT involves a cooperative transition to a molten globule form, followed by a non-cooperative transition to a random-coil form as more guanidine is added. Thus, the entire α1-AT molecule consists of one cooperative structural unit rather than multiple structural domains with different stabilities. Furthermore, our results together with previous mutagenesis studies suggest a possible link between an equilibrium molten globule and a functional intermediate that may be populated during the protease inhibition.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283607006754
00222836