Thermodynamic Analysis of the Disorder-to-α-Helical Transition of 18.5-kDa Myelin Basic Protein Reveals an Equilibrium Intermediate Representing the Most Compact Conformation
6505662181,56577315300,15841523500,7004328741
intrinsically disordered protein,myelin basic protein (MBP),molecular recognition fragment (MoRF),protein folding intermediate,Förster (fluorescence) resonance energy transfer (FRET)
The intrinsically disordered, 18.5-kDa isoform of myelin basic protein (MBP) is a peripheral membrane protein that is essential to proper myelin formation in the central nervous system. MBP acts in oligodendrocytes both to adjoin membrane leaflets to each other in forming myelin and as a hub in numerous protein–protein and protein–membrane interaction networks. Like many intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), MBP multifunctionality arises from its high conformational plasticity and its ability to undergo reversible disorder-to-order transitions. One such transition is the disorder-to-α-helical conformational change that is induced upon MBP–membrane binding. Here, we have investigated the disorder-to-α-helical transition of MBP-derived α-peptides and the full-length 18.5-kDa protein. This transition was induced through titration of the membrane-mimetic solvent trifluoroethanol into both protein and peptide solutions, and conformational change was monitored using circular dichroism spectroscopy, 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid binding, tryptophan fluorescence quenching, and Förster (fluorescence) resonance energy transfer measurements. The data suggest that the disorder-to-α-helical transition of MBP follows a 3-state model: disordered↔intermediate↔α-helical, with each of the identified equilibrium states likely representing a conformational ensemble. The disordered state is characterized by slight compaction with little regular secondary structure, whereas the intermediate is also disordered but globally more compact. Surprisingly, the α-helical conformation is less compact than the intermediate. This study suggests that multifunctionality in MBP could arise from differences in the population of energetically distinct ensembles under different conditions and also provides an example of an IDP that undergoes cooperative global conformation change.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283615001953
00222836