Evidence for Initial Non-specific Polypeptide Chain Collapse During the Refolding of the SH3 Domain of PI3 Kinase
36672710400,35563592100
PI3K SH3 domain,burst-phase,collapse,continuous,FRET
Refolding of the SH3 domain of PI3 kinase from the guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl)-unfolded state has been probed with millisecond (stopped flow) and sub-millisecond (continuous flow) measurements of the change in fluorescence, circular dichroism, ANS fluorescence and three-site fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) efficiency. Fluorescence measurements are unable to detect structural changes preceding the rate-limiting step of folding, whereas measurements of changes in ANS fluorescence and FRET efficiency indicate that polypeptide chain collapse precedes the major structural transition. The initial chain collapse reaction is complete within 150 μs. The collapsed form at this time possesses hydrophobic clusters to which ANS binds. Each of the three measured intra-molecular distances has contracted to an extent predicted by the dependence of the FRET signal in completely unfolded protein on denaturant concentration, indicating that contraction is non-specific. The extent of contraction of each intra-molecular distance in the collapsed product of sub-millisecond folding increases continuously with a decrease in [GdnHCl]. The gradual contraction is continuous with the gradual contraction seen in completely unfolded protein, and its dependence on [GdnHCl] is not indicative of an all-or-none collapse reaction. The dependence of the extent of contraction on [GdnHCl] was similar for the three distances, indicating that chain collapse occurs in a synchronous manner across different segments of the polypeptide chain. The sub-millisecond measurements of folding in GdnHCl were unable to determine whether hydrophobic cluster formation, probed by ANS fluorescence measurement, precedes chain contraction probed by FRET. To determine whether hydrogen bonding plays a role in initial chain collapse, folding was initiated by dilution of the urea-unfolded state. The extent of contraction of at least one intra-molecular distance in the collapsed product of sub-millisecond folding in urea is similar to that seen in GdnHCl, and the initial contraction in urea too appears to be gradual.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283610009368
00222836