Structure-Guided Mutational Analysis of a Yeast DEAD-Box Protein Involved in Mitochondrial RNA Splicing
24330561700,35772663200,6603631223
DEAD-box proteins,helicase,catalytic introns,mitochondrial RNA processing,Saccharomyces cerevisiae
DEAD-box proteins are RNA-dependent ATPase enzymes that have been implicated in nearly all aspects of RNA metabolism. Since many of these enzymes have been shown to possess common biochemical properties in vitro, including the ability to bind and hydrolyze ATP, to bind nucleic acid, and to promote helix unwinding, DEAD-box proteins are generally thought to modulate RNA structure in vivo. However, the extent to which these enzymatic properties are important for the in vivo functions of DEAD-box proteins remains unclear. To evaluate how these properties influence DEAD-box protein native function, we probed the importance of several highly conserved residues in the yeast DEAD-box protein Mss116p, which is required for the splicing of all mitochondrial catalytic introns in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Using an MSS116 deletion strain, we have expressed plasmid-borne variants of MSS116 containing substitutions in residues predicted to be important for extensive networks of interactions required for ATP hydrolysis and helix unwinding. We have analyzed the importance of these residues to the splicing functions of Mss116p in vivo and compared these results with the biochemical properties of recombinant proteins determined here and in previously published work. We observed that the efficiency by which an Mss116p variant catalyzes ATP hydrolysis correlates with facilitating mitochondrial splicing, while efficient helix unwinding appears to be insufficient for splicing. In addition, we show that each splicing-defective variant affects the splicing of structurally diverse introns to the same degree. Together, these observations suggest that the efficiency by which Mss116p catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATP is critical for all of its splicing functions in vivo. Given that ATP hydrolysis stimulates the recycling of DEAD-box proteins, these observations support a model in which enzyme turnover is a crucial factor in Mss116p splicing function. These results are discussed in the context of current models of Mss116p-facilitated splicing.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283610002780
00222836