Comparing the Functional Roles of Nonconserved Sequence Positions in Homologous Transcription Repressors: Implications for Sequence/Function Analyses
16426373200,25937432300,6602142383
LacI/GalR repressor proteins,specificity determinants,protein engineering,bioinformatics,protein evolution
The explosion of protein sequences deduced from genetic code has led to both a problem and a potential resource: Efficient data use requires interpreting the functional impact of sequence change without experimentally characterizing each protein variant. Several groups have hypothesized that interpretation could be aided by analyzing the sequences of naturally occurring homologues. To that end, myriad sequence/function analyses have been developed to predict which conserved, semi-conserved, and nonconserved positions are functionally important. These positions must be discriminated from the nonconserved positions that are functionally silent. However, the assumptions that underlie sequence analyses are based on experimental results that are sparse and usually designed to address different questions. Here, we use three homologues from a test family common to bioinformatics—the LacI/GalR transcription repressors—to test a common assumption: If a position is functionally important for one family member, it has similar importance in all homologues. We generated experimental sequence/function information for each nonconserved position in the 18 amino acids that link the DNA-binding and regulatory domains of three LacI/GalR homologues. We find that the functional importance of each position is preserved among the three linkers, albeit to different degrees. We also find that every linker position contributes to function, which has twofold implications. (1) Since the linker positions range from highly conserved to semi-conserved to nonconserved and contribute to affinity, selectivity, and allosteric response, we assert that sequence/function analyses must identify positions in the LacI/GalR linkers to be qualified as “successful”. Many analyses overlook this region since most of the residues do not directly contact ligand. (2) No position in the LacI/GalR linker is functionally silent. This finding is inconsistent with another underlying principle of many analyses: Using sequence sets to discriminate important from non-contributing positions obligates silent positions, which denotes that most homologues tolerate a variety of amino acid substitutions at the position without functional change. Instead, additional combinatorial mutants in the LacI/GalR linkers show that particular substitutions can be silent in a context-dependent manner. Thus, specific permutations of sequence change (rather than change at silent positions) would facilitate neutral drift during evolution. Finally, the combinatorial mutants also reveal functional synergy between semi- and nonconserved positions. Such functional relationships would be missed by analyses that rely primarily upon co-evolution.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283609012170
00222836