Detecting Compensatory Covariation Signals in Protein Evolution Using Reconstructed Ancestral Sequences
6602479561,7103248833,7102359712
functional genomics,molecular evolution,structural biology,compensatory covariation,mutation,natural selection
When protein sequences divergently evolve under functional constraints, some individual amino acid replacements that reverse the charge (e.g. Lys to Asp) may be compensated by a replacement at a second position that reverses the charge in the opposite direction (e.g. Glu to Arg). When these side-chains are near in space (proximal), such double replacements might be driven by natural selection, if either is selectively disadvantageous, but both together restore fully the ability of the protein to contribute to fitness (are together “neutral”). Accordingly, many have sought to identify pairs of positions in a protein sequence that suffer compensatory replacements, often as a way to identify positions near in space in the folded structure. A “charge compensatory signal” might manifest itself in two ways. First, proximal charge compensatory replacements may occur more frequently than predicted from the product of the probabilities of individual positions suffering charge reversing replacements independently. Conversely, charge compensatory pairs of changes may be observed to occur more frequently in proximal pairs of sites than in the average pair. Normally, charge compensatory covariation is detected by comparing the sequences of extant proteins at the “leaves” of phylogenetic trees. We show here that the charge compensatory signal is more evident when it is sought by examining individual branches in the tree between reconstructed ancestral sequences at nodes in the tree. Here, we find that the signal is especially strong when the positions pairs are in a single secondary structural unit (e.g. α helix or β strand) that brings the side-chains suffering charge compensatory covariation near in space, and may be useful in secondary structure prediction. Also, “node–node” and “node–leaf” compensatory covariation may be useful to identify the better of two equally parsimonious trees, in a way that is independent of the mathematical formalism used to construct the tree itself. Further, compensatory covariation may provide a signal that indicates whether an episode of sequence evolution contains more or less divergence in functional behavior. Compensatory covariation analysis on reconstructed evolutionary trees may become a valuable tool to analyze genome sequences, and use these analyses to extract biomedically useful information from proteome databases.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602002395
00222836