Homology, Pathway Distance and Chromosomal Localization of the Small Molecule Metabolism Enzymes in Escherichia coli
6603552447,7003495551,7402781853
homology,small molecule metabolism,pathway evolution,chromosomal localisation,operons
Here, we analyse Escherichia coli enzymes involved in small molecule metabolism (SMM). We introduce the concept of pathway distance as a measure of the number of distinct metabolic steps separating two SMM enzymes, and we consider protein homology (as determined by assigning enzymes to structural and sequence families) and gene interval (the number of genes separating two genes on the E.coli chromosome). The relationships between these three contexts (pathway distance, homology and chromosomal localisation) is investigated extensively. We make use of these relationships to suggest possible SMM evolution mechanisms.Homology between enzyme pairs close in the SMM was higher than expected by chance but was still rare. When observed, homologues usually conserved their reaction mechanism and/or co-factor binding rather than shared substrate binding. The correlation between pathway distance and gene intervals was clear. Enzymes catalysing nearby SMM reactions were usually encoded by genes close by on the E.coli chromosome. We found many co-regulated blocks of three to four genes (usually non-homologous) encoding enzymes occurring within four metabolic steps of one another; nearly all of these blocks formed part of known or predicted operons.The “inline reuse” of enzymes (i.e. the use of the same enzyme to catalyse two or more different steps of a metabolic pathway) is also discussed: of these enzymes, four were multifunctional (i.e. catalysed a different reaction in each instance), nine had multiple substrate specificity (i.e. catalysed the same reaction on different substrates in each instance) and one catalysed the same reaction on the same substrate but as part of two different complexes. We also identified 59 sets of isozymic proteins most commonly duplicated to function under different conditions, or with a different preferred substrate or minor substrate. In addition to transcriptional units, isozymes and inline reuse of enzymes provide mechanisms for controlling the SMM network.Our data suggest that several pathway evolution mechanisms may occur in concert, although chemistry-driven duplication/recruitment is favoured. SMM exploits regulatory strategies involving chromosomal location, isozymes and the reuse of enzymes.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602001407
00222836