The reverse transcriptase of the R2 non-LTR retrotransposon: continuous synthesis of cDNA on non-continuous RNA templates11Edited by M. Gottesman
6602214077,7006405535
reverse transcriptase,retrotransposons,retroviruses,template switch,priming
R2 is a non-long terminal repeat (non-LTR) retrotransposon that inserts into the 28 S rRNA genes of arthropods. The element encodes two enzymatic activities: an endonuclease that specifically cleaves the 28 S gene target site, and a reverse transcriptase (RT) that can use the 3′ end of the cleaved DNA to prime reverse transcription. R2 RT only utilizes RNA templates that contain the 3′ untranslated region of the R2 element as templates in this target primed reverse transcription (TPRT) reaction. Here, detailed biochemical characterization of the R2 RT indicates that the enzyme is capable of making multiple, consecutive jumps between RNA templates. The terminal 3′ nucleotide of the “acceptor” RNA and the 5′ nucleotide of the “donor” RNA are frequently reverse transcribed in these jumps, indicating that the acceptor RNA does not anneal to the cDNA derived from the donor RNA template. These template jumps occur during TPRT as well as in non-specific extension reactions in which reverse transcription is primed by an oligonucleotide annealed to the RNA template. Analysis of these RT assays done in the absence of the target DNA also revealed that the R2 RT can initiate reverse transcription near the 3′ end of any RNA molecule using the 3′ end of a second RNA molecule as primer. Again there is no requirement for sequence complementarity between the RNA used as template and the RNA used as primer. These properties of the R2 RT differ substantially from those of retroviral RTs but have similarities to the RT of the Mauriceville retroplasmid of Neurospora crassa. We present a model which relates these unusual properties of the R2 RT to structural differences from retroviral RTs as well as correlates these properties to the likely retrotransposition mechanism of R2 and other non-LTR retrotransposons.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601953690
00222836