Structure and mechanism of action of a cofactor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutase homolog from Bacillus stearothermophilus with broad specificity phosphatase activity11Edited by R. Huber
7005750773,7005714723,7103291401,35458593400
Bacillus species,crystal structure,phosphatase,structure-function relationship,YhfR,PhoE
The crystal structure of Bacillus stearothermophilus PhoE (originally termed YhfR), a broad specificity monomeric phosphatase with a molecular mass of ∼24 kDa, has been solved at 2.3 Å resolution in order to investigate its structure and function. PhoE, already identified as a homolog of a cofactor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutase, shares with the latter an α/β/α sandwich structure spanning, as a structural excursion, a smaller subdomain composed of two α-helices and one short β-strand. The active site contains residues from both the α/β/α sandwich and the sub-domain. With the exception of the hydrophilic catalytic machinery conserved throughout the cofactor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutase family, the active-site cleft is strikingly hydrophobic. Docking studies with two diverse, favored substrates show that 3-phosphoglycerate may bind to the catalytic core, while α-napthylphosphate binding also involves the hydrophobic portion of the active-site cleft. Combining a highly favorable phospho group binding site common to these substrate binding modes and data from related enzymes, a catalytic mechanism can be proposed that involves formation of a phosphohistidine intermediate on His10 and likely acid-base behavior of Glu83. Other structural factors contributing to the broad substrate specificity of PhoE can be identified. The dynamic independence of the subdomain may enable the active-site cleft to accommodate substrates of different sizes, although similar motions are present in simulations of cofactor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutases, perhaps favoring a more general functional role. A significant number of entries in protein sequence databases, particularly from unfinished microbial genomes, are more similar to PhoE than to cofactor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutases or to fructose-2,6-bisphosphatases. This PhoE structure will therefore serve as a valuable basis for inference of structural and functional characteristics of these proteins.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601952908
00222836