Deoxyribonucleoside kinases belonging to the thymidine kinase 2 (TK2)-like group vary significantly in substrate specificity, kinetics and feed-back regulation11Edited by J. Karn
26643243500,54887639800,56268346200,7006070008
Bombyx mori,deoxyribonucleoside kinase,Drosophila melanogaster,nucleoside analogs,Xenopus laevis
In eukaryotic cells deoxyribonucleoside kinases belonging to three phylogenetic sub-families have been found: (i) thymidine kinase 1 (TK1)-like enzymes, which are strictly pyrimidine deoxyribonucleoside-specific kinases; (ii) TK2-like enzymes, which include pyrimidine deoxyribonucleoside kinases and a single multisubstrate kinase from Drosophila melanogaster (Dm-dNK); and (iii) deoxycytidine/deoxyguanosine kinase (dCK/dGK)-like enzymes, which are deoxycytidine and/or purine deoxyribonucleoside-specific kinases. We cloned and characterized two new deoxyribonucleoside kinases belonging to the TK2-like group from the insect Bombyx mori and the amphibian Xenopus laevis. The deoxyribonucleoside kinase from B. mori (Bm-dNK) turned out to be a multisubstrate kinase like Dm-dNK. But uniquely for a deoxyribonucleoside kinase, Bm-dNK displayed positive cooperativity with all four natural deoxyribonucleoside substrates. The deoxyribonucleoside kinase from X. laevis (Xen-PyK) resembled closely the human and mouse TK2 enzymes displaying their characteristic Michaelis-Menten kinetic with deoxycytidine and negative cooperativity with its second natural substrate thymidine. Bm-dNK, Dm-dNK and Xen-PyK were shown to be homodimers. Significant differences in the feedback inhibition by deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates between these three enzymes were found. The insect multisubstrate deoxyribonucleoside kinases Bm-dNK and Dm-dNK were only inhibited by thymidine triphosphate, while Xen-PyK was inhibited by thymidine and deoxycytidine triphosphate in a complex pattern depending on the deoxyribonucleoside substrate. The broad substrate specificity and different feedback regulation of the multisubstrate insect deoxyribonucleoside kinases may indicate that these enzymes have a different functional role than the other members of the TK2-like group.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228360195257X
00222836