Protein structure prediction constrained by solution X-ray scattering data and structural homology identification11Edited by F. E. Cohen
34972403100,7006598574
SAXS,protein structure prediction,diamond lattice model,structural homology
Here we perform a systematic exploration of the use of distance constraints derived from small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements to filter candidate protein structures for the purpose of protein structure prediction. This is an intrinsically more complex task than that of applying distance constraints derived from NMR data where the identity of the pair of amino acid residues subject to a given distance constraint is known. SAXS, on the other hand, yields a histogram of pair distances (pair distribution function), but the identities of the pairs contributing to a given bin of the histogram are not known. Our study is based on an extension of the Levitt-Hinds coarse grained approach to ab initio protein structure prediction to generate a candidate set of Cα backbones. In spite of the lack of specific residue information inherent in the SAXS data, our study shows that the implementation of a SAXS filter is capable of effectively purifying the set of native structure candidates and thus provides a substantial improvement in the reliability of protein structure prediction. We test the quality of our predicted Cα backbones by doing structural homology searches against the Dali domain library, and find that the results are very encouraging. In spite of the lack of local structural details and limited modeling accuracy at the Cα backbone level, we find that useful information about fold classification can be extracted from this procedure. This approach thus provides a way to use a SAXS data based structure prediction algorithm to generate potential structural homologies in cases where lack of sequence homology prevents identification of candidate folds for a given protein. Thus our approach has the potential to help in determination of the biological function of a protein based on structural homology instead of sequence homology.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601953240
00222836