Rearrangement of Substrate Secondary Structure Facilitates Binding to the Neurospora VS Ribozyme
6507137013,7403351065
binding,ligation,conformation,catalytic RNA,RNA structure
The Neurospora VS ribozyme differs from other small, naturally occurring ribozymes in that it recognizes for trans cleavage or ligation a substrate that consists largely of a stem-loop structure. We have previously found that cleavage or ligation by the VS ribozyme requires substantial rearrangement of the secondary structure of stem-loop I, which contains the cleavage/ligation site. This rearrangement includes breaking the top base-pair of stem-loop I, allowing formation of a kissing interaction with loop V, and changing the partners of at least three other base-pairs within stem-loop I to adopt a conformation termed shifted. In the work presented, we have designed a binding assay and used mutational analysis to investigate the contribution of each of these structural changes to binding and ligation. We find that the loop I–V kissing interaction is necessary but not sufficient for binding and ligation. Constitutive opening of the top base-pair of stem-loop I has little, if any, effect on either activity. In contrast, the ability to adopt the shifted conformation of stem-loop I is a major determinant of binding: mutants that cannot adopt this conformation bind much more weakly than wild-type and mutants with a constitutively shifted stem-loop I bind much more strongly. These results implicate the adoption of the shifted structure of stem-loop I as an important process at the binding step in the VS ribozyme reaction pathway. Further investigation of features near the cleavage/ligation site revealed that sulphur substitution of the non-bridging phosphate oxygen atoms immediately downstream of the cleavage/ligation site, implicated in a putative metal ion binding site, significantly altered the cleavage/ligation equilibrium but did not perturb substrate binding significantly. This indicates that the substituted oxygen atoms, or an associated metal ion, affect a step that occurs after binding and that they influence the rates of cleavage and ligation differently.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602011518
00222836