Ions and Counterions in a Biological Channel: A Molecular Dynamics Simulation of OmpF Porin from Escherichia coli in an Explicit Membrane with 1M KCl Aqueous Salt Solution
7005962023,35464598700
permeation,diffusion,ion solvation,ion pairing,β-barrel
A 5ns all-atom molecular dynamics trajectory of Escherichia coli OmpF porin embedded in an explicit dimyristoyl-phosphatidylcholine (DMPC) bilayer bathed by a 1M [KCl] aqueous salt solution is generated to explore the microscopic details of the mechanism of ion permeation. The atomic model includes the OmpF trimer, 124 DMPC, 13470 water molecules as well as 231 K+ and 201 Cl−, for a total of 70,693 atoms. The structural and dynamical results are in excellent agreement with the X-ray data. The global root-mean-square deviation of the backbone atoms relative to the X-ray structure is 1.4Å. A cluster of three fully charged arginine (Arg42, Arg82, and Arg132) facing two acidic residues (Asp113 and Glu117) on L3 in the narrowest part of the aqueous pore is observed to be very stable in the crystallographic conformation. In this region of the pore, the water molecules are markedly oriented perpendicular to the channel axis due to the strong transversal electrostatic field arising from those residues. On average the size of the pore is smaller during the simulation than in the X-ray structure, undergoing small fluctuations. No large movements of loop L3 leading to a gating of the pore are observed. Remarkably, it is observed that K+ and Cl− follow two well-separated average pathways spanning over nearly 40Å along the axis of the pore. In the center of the monomer, the two screw-like pathways have a left-handed twist, undergoing a counter-clockwise rotation of 180° from the extracellular vestibule to the pore periplasmic side. In the pore, the dynamical diffusion constants of the ions are reduced by about 50% relative to their value in bulk solvent. Analysis of ion solvation across the channel reveals that the contributions from the water and the protein are complementary, keeping the total solvation number of both ions nearly constant. Unsurprisingly, K+ have a higher propensity to occupy the aqueous pore than Cl−, consistent with the cation selectivity of the channel. However, further analysis suggests that ion–ion pairs play an important role. In particular, it is observed that the passage of Cl− occurs only in the presence of K+ counterions, and isolated K+ can move through the channel and permeate on their own. The presence of K+ in the pore screens the negative electrostatic potential arising from OmpF to help the translocation of Cl− by formation of ion pairs.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602003807
00222836