Dissecting the Gelsolin–Polyphosphoinositide Interaction and Engineering of a Polyphosphoinositide-sensitive Gelsolin C-terminal Half Protein
7004036922,7005414195
actin,gelsolin,polyphosphoinositides,PI(4)P,PI(4,5)P2
Gelsolin and other proteins in the villin/gelsolin family are regulated by polyphosphoinositides (PPIs), and manipulation of cellular PIP2 levels alters the structure of the actin cytoskeleton coincident with the dissociation of gelsolin–actin complexes. This work explores the structure–function relationship of the gelsolin–PPI interaction. Circular dichroism experiments show that upon binding to PPIs, the PPI-sensitive N-terminal half of gelsolin undergoes significant secondary and tertiary structural changes that do not occur in the structurally homologous but PPI-insensitive C-terminal half. Secondary structure modeling algorithms predict an α-helical conformation for one of the gelsolin PPI-binding sites, P2, which differs from the conformation of P2 in the structure of gelsolin determined by X-ray crystallography, whereas structure prediction of the C-terminal homolog of P2 agrees well with the X-ray crystallography structure. Simulation of a change to helical conformation for P2 using molecular modeling indicates that such a structural transition will destabilize the F-actin-binding sites in domain 2. A hypothesis is proposed that PPIs initiate conformational changes at the PPI-binding site(s) that destabilize the protein structure, and subsequently disrupt the actin-binding sites. To further evaluate the role of P2 in the gelsolin–PPI interaction, a Ct mutant P2Ct is constructed by inserting P2 in place of its C-terminal homologous site. P2Ct interacts with actin in the same way as the wild-type protein. In contrast to Ct, however, P2Ct interacts strongly with PPIs, and its monomeric actin-binding activity becomes regulated by PPIs. It is concluded that the P2 site is sufficient for PPI-sensitivity in gelsolin. Furthermore, the P2 site in P2Ct and the actin-binding sites of Ct do not overlap, suggesting that PPIs regulate actin binding of P2Ct through induction of structural changes, rather than through direct competition.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602008410
00222836