Simulations of apo and holo-fatty acid binding protein: structure and dynamics of protein, ligand and internal water11Edited by B. Honig
6603259090,25935439000
protein cavity,protein hydration,water droplet,water exchange pathway,water residence time
Two molecular dynamics simulations of 5 ns each have been carried out for rat intestinal fatty acid binding protein, in apo-form and with bound palmitate. The fatty acid and a number of water molecules are encapsulated in a large interior cavity of the barrel-shaped protein. The simulations are compared to experimental data and analyzed in terms of root mean square deviations, atomic B-factors, secondary structure elements, hydrogen bond patterns, and distance constraints derived from nuclear Overhauser experiments. Excellent agreement is found between simulated and experimental solution structures of holo-FABP, but a number of differences are observed for the apo-form. The ligand in holo-FABP shows considerable displacement after about 1.5 ns and displays significant configurational entropy. A novel computational approach has been employed to identify internal water and to capture exchange pathways. Orifices in the portal and gap regions of the protein, discussed in the experimental literature, have been confirmed as major openings for solvent exchange between the internal cavity and bulk water. A third opening on the opposite side of the barrel experiences significant exchange but it does not provide a pathway for further passage to the central cavity. Internal water is characterized in terms of density distributions, interaction energies, mobility, protein contact times, and water molecule coordination. A number of differences are observed between the apo and holo-forms and related to differences in the protein structure. Solvent inside apo-FABP, for example, shows characteristics of a water droplet, while solvent in holo-FABP benefits from interactions with the ligand headgroup and slightly stronger interactions with protein residues.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601952027
00222836