High level production of functional antibody fab fragments in an oxidizing bacterial cytoplasm11Edited by J. Karn
7006559806,7004485678,7004676417
antibody,Fab fragments,overproduction,oxidizing bacterial cytoplasm,functionality
The antigen-binding fragments (Fab) of antibodies are powerful tools in clinal therapy, molecular diagnostics and basic research. However, their principal applications require pure recombinant molecules in large amounts, which are challenging to obtain. Severe limitations in yield, folding and functionality are commonly encountered in bacterial production of Fab fragments. Secretion into the oxidizing periplasm generally results in low yield, whereas expression in the reducing cytoplasmic environment produces unfolded or non-functional protein. We hypothesized that an impaired reducing environment of the cytoplasm would permit correctly folded, functional cytoplasmic expression of Fabs with high yield. We used the Escherichia coli strain FA113, which has no activity of both thioredoxin and glutathione reductase, and thus has an oxidizing cytoplasmic environment. With the newly constructed vector pFAB1 we tested the cytoplasmic expression of two Fab fragments, which recognize the integral membrane protein NhaA, a bacterial Na+/H+ antiporter. These antibodies differ in terms of DNA sequence and stability. Both antibody fragments were produced to very high yields (10-30 mg/l from bacterial cultures at an A600 nm = 1.2-1.3). This is a factor 50-250 times higher than any other reported over-expression strategy for Fab fragments and currently represents the highest production rate ever been reported for antibody Fab fragments in bacteria grown to similar cell densities. The fragments are fully functional and can be efficiently purified by His-tag chromatography. Expression of active Fab fragments in the bacterial cytoplasm unlocks the possibility of using antibody specific targeting in an intracellular environment. Such a capacity opens new perspectives for investigating metabolic and regulatory pathways in vivo and also provides a powerful selection system for functional genomics.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601952210
00222836