Differential Salt-induced Stabilization of Structure in the Initial Folding Intermediate Ensemble of Barstar
7801522258,35563592100
salt-induced protein stabilization,Hofmeister effect,burst phase intermediate,protein folding,protein electrostatics
The effects of two salts, KCl and MgCl2, on the stability and folding kinetics of barstar have been studied at pH 8. Equilibrium urea unfolding curves were used to show that the free energy of unfolding, ΔGUN, of barstar increased from a value of 4.7kcalmol−1 in the absence of salt to a value of 6.9kcalmol−1 in the presence of 1M KCl or 1M MgCl2. For both salts, ΔGUN increases linearly with an increase in concentration of salt from 0M to 1M, suggesting that stabilization of the native state occurs primarily through a Hofmeister effect. Refolding kinetics were studied in detail in the presence of 1M KCl as well as in the presence of 1M MgCl2, and it is shown that the basic folding mechanism is not altered upon addition of salt. The major effects on the refolding kinetics can be attributed to the stabilization of the initial burst phase ensemble, IE, by salt. Stabilization of structure in IE by KCl causes the fluorescence properties of IE to change, so that there is an initial burst phase change in fluorescence at 320nm, during refolding. The structure in IE is stabilized by MgCl2, but no burst phase change in fluorescence at 320nm is observed during refolding. The fluorescence emission spectra of IE show that when refolding is initiated in 1M KCl, the three tryptophan residues in IE are less solvent exposed than when folding is initiated in 1M MgCl2. Stabilization of IE leads to an acceleration in the rate of the fast observable phase of folding by both salts, suggesting that structure of the transition state resembles that of IE. The stabilization of IE by salts can be accounted for largely by the same mechanism that accounts for the stabilization of the native state of the protein, namely through the Hofmeister effect. The salts do not affect the rates of the slower phases of folding, indicating that the late intermediate ensemble, IL, is not stabilized by salts. Stabilization of the native state results in deceleration of the fast unfolding rate, which has virtually no dependence on the concentration of KCl or MgCl2 at high concentrations. The observation that the salt-induced stabilization of structure in IE is accompanied by an acceleration in the fast folding rate, suggests that IE is likely to be a productive on-pathway intermediate.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602010689
00222836