Free Energy and Structural Pathways of Base Flipping in a DNA GCGC Containing Sequence
6602830466,7005690760
base opening,major groove,minor groove,potential of mean force,umbrella sampling
Structural distortions of DNA are essential for its biological function due to the genetic information of DNA not being physically accessible in the duplex state. Base flipping is one of the simplest structural distortions of DNA and may represent an initial event in strand separation required to access the genetic code. Flipping is also utilized by DNA-modifying and repair enzymes to access specific bases. It is typically thought that base flipping (or base-pair opening) occurs via the major groove whereas minor groove flipping is only possible when mediated by DNA-binding proteins. Here, umbrella sampling with a novel center-of-mass pseudodihedral reaction coordinate was used to calculate the individual potentials of mean force (PMF) for flipping of the Watson–Crick (WC) paired C and G bases in the CCATGCGCTGAC DNA dodecamer. The novel reaction coordinate allowed explicit investigation of the complete flipping process via both the minor and major groove pathways. The minor and major groove barriers to flipping are similar for C base flipping while the major groove barrier is slightly lower for G base flipping. Minor groove flipping requires distortion of the WC partner while the flipping base pulls away from its partner during major groove flipping. The flipped states are represented by relatively flat free energy surfaces, with a small, local minimum observed for the flipped G base. Conserved patterns of phosphodiester backbone dihedral distortions during flipping indicate their essential role in the flipping process. During flipping, the target base tracks along the respective grooves, leading to hydrogen-bonding interactions with neighboring base-pairs. Such hydrogen-bonding interactions with the neighboring sequence suggest a novel mechanism of sequence dependence in DNA dynamics.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602001948
00222836