TraY DNA Recognition of Its Two F Factor Binding Sites
7005246497,7102573072,6603721921
bacterial conjugation,F factor,TraY,DNA specificity,ribbon-helix-helix
F factor TraY, a ribbon-helix-helix DNA-binding protein, performs two roles in bacterial conjugation. TraY binds the F origin of transfer (oriT) to promote nicking of plasmid DNA prior to conjugative transfer. TraY also binds the PY promoter to up-regulate tra gene expression. The two plasmid regions bound by TraY share limited sequence identity, yet TraY binds them with similar affinities. TraY recognition of the two sites was first probed using in vitro footprinting methods. Hydroxyl radical footprinting at both oriT and PY sites indicated that bound TraY protected the DNA backbone bordering three adjacent DNA subsites. Analytical ultracentrifugation results for TraY:oligonucleotide complexes were consistent with two of these subsites being bound cooperatively, and the third being occupied at higher TraY concentrations. Methylation protection and interference footprinting identified several guanine bases contacted by or proximal to bound TraY, most located within these subsites. TraY affinity for variant oriT sequences with base substitutions at or near these guanine bases suggested that two of the three subsites correspond to high-affinity, cooperatively bound imperfect inverted GA(G/T)A repeats. Altering the spacing or orientation of these sites reduced binding. TraY mutant R73A failed to protect two symmetry-related oriT guanine bases in these repeats from methylation, identifying possible direct TraY-DNA contacts. The third subsite appears to be oriented as an imperfect direct repeat with its adjacent subsite, although base substitutions at this subsite did not reduce binding. Although unusual for ribbon-helix-helix proteins, this binding site arrangement occurs at both F TraY sites, consistent with it being functionally relevant.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602006800
00222836