Folding Mechanism of Indole-3-glycerol Phosphate Synthase from Sulfolobus solfataricus: A Test of the Conservation of Folding Mechanisms Hypothesis in (βα)8 Barrels
6603679282,56235307600
conserved folding mechanisms,TIM barrel
As a test of the hypothesis that folding mechanisms are better conserved than sequences in TIM barrels, the equilibrium and kinetic folding mechanisms of indole-3-glycerol phosphate synthase (sIGPS) from the thermoacidophilic archaebacterium Sulfolobus solfataricus were compared to the well-characterized models of the alpha subunit of tryptophan synthase (αTS) from Escherichia coli. A multifaceted approach combining urea denaturation and far-UV circular dichroism, tyrosine fluorescence total intensity, and tyrosine fluorescence anisotropy was employed. Despite a sequence identity of only 13%, a stable intermediate (I) in sIGPS was found to be similar to a stable intermediate in αTS in terms of its thermodynamic properties and secondary structure. Kinetic experiments revealed that the fastest detectable folding event for sIGPS involves a burst-phase (&lt;5ms) reaction that leads directly to the stable intermediate. The slower of two subsequent phases reflects the formation/disruption of an off-pathway dimeric form of I. The faster phase reflects the conversion of I to the native state and is limited by folding under marginally stable conditions and by isomerization or rearrangement under strongly folding conditions. By contrast, αTS is thought to fold via an off-pathway burst-phase intermediate whose unfolding controls access to a set of four on-pathway intermediates that comprise the stable equilibrium intermediate. At least three proline isomerization reactions are known to limit their interconversions and lead to a parallel channel mechanism. The simple sequential mechanism deduced for sIGPS reflects the dominance of the on-pathway burst-phase intermediate and the absence of prolyl residues that partition the stable intermediate into kinetically distinguishable species. Comparison of the results for sIGPS and αTS demonstrates that the thermodynamic properties and the final steps of the folding reaction are better conserved than the early events. The initial events in folding appear to be more sensitive to the sequence differences between the two TIM barrel proteins.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602005570
00222836