Towards a consistent modeling of protein thermodynamic and kinetic cooperativity: how applicable is the transition state picture to folding and unfolding?11Edited by C. R. Matthews
7102340317,55663530400
calorimetric cooperativity,single-exponential kinetics,rugged landscape,unfolding,chevron plot
To what extent do general features of folding/unfolding kinetics of small globular proteins follow from their thermodynamic properties? To address this question, we investigate a new simplifed protein chain model that embodies a cooperative interplay between local conformational preferences and hydrophobic burial. The present four-helix-bundle 55mer model exhibits protein-like calorimetric two-state cooperativity. It rationalizes native-state hydrogen exchange observations. Our analysis indicates that a coherent, self-consistent physical account of both the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of the model leads naturally to the concept of a native state ensemble that encompasses considerable conformational fluctuations. Such a multiple-conformation native state is seen to involve conformational states similar to those revealed by native-state hydrogen exchange. Many of these conformational states are predicted to lie below native baselines commonly used in interpreting calorimetric data. Folding and unfolding kinetics are studied under a range of intrachain interaction strengths as in experimental chevron plots. Kinetically determined transition midpoints match well with their thermodynamic counterparts. Kinetic relaxations are found to be essentially single-exponential over an extended range of model interaction strengths. This includes the entire unfolding regime and a significant part of a folding regime with a chevron rollover, as has been observed for real proteins that fold with non-two-state kinetics. The transition state picture of protein folding and unfolding is evaluated by comparing thermodynamic free energy profiles with actual kinetic rates. These analyses suggest that some chevron rollovers may arise from an internal frictional effect that increasingly impedes chain motions with more native conditions, rather than being caused by discrete deadtime folding intermediates or shifts of the transition state peak as previously posited.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283601952660
00222836