Connectivity between Catalytic Landscapes of the Metallo-β-Lactamase Superfamily
56139476100,23768336700
enzyme evolution,catalytic promiscuity,enzyme superfamily,catalytic landscape
The expansion of functions in an enzyme superfamily is thought to occur through recruitment of latent promiscuous functions within existing enzymes. Thus, the promiscuous activities of enzymes represent connections between different catalytic landscapes and provide an additional layer of evolutionary connectivity between functional families alongside their sequence and structural relationships. Functional connectivity has been observed between individual functional families; however, little is known about how catalytic landscapes are connected throughout a highly diverged superfamily. Here, we describe a superfamily-wide analysis of evolutionary and functional connectivity in the metallo-β-lactamase (MBL) superfamily. We investigated evolutionary connections between functional families and related evolutionary to functional connectivity; 24 enzymes from 15 distinct functional families were challenged against 10 catalytically distinct reactions. We revealed that enzymes of this superfamily are generally promiscuous, as each enzyme catalyzes on average 1.5 reactions in addition to its native one. Catalytic landscapes in the MBL superfamily overlap substantially; each reaction is connected on average to 3.7 other reactions whereas some connections appear to be unrelated to recent evolutionary events and occur between chemically distinct reactions. These findings support the idea that the highly distinct reactions in the MBL superfamily could have evolved from a common ancestor traversing a continuous network via promiscuous enzymes. Several functional connections (e.g., the lactonase/phosphotriesterase and phosphonatase/phosphodiesterase/arylsulfatase reactions) are also observed in structurally and evolutionary distinct superfamilies, suggesting that these catalytic landscapes are substantially connected. Our results show that new enzymatic functions could evolve rapidly from the current diversity of enzymes and range of promiscuous activities.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283614001971
00222836