Determination of the Physiological Dimer Interface of the PhoQ Sensor Domain
8052792700,35951413100,6603734698,7102582515
PhoQ,disulfide scanning,molecular modeling,two-component signaling,histidine kinase
PhoQ is the transmembrane sensor kinase of the phoPQ two-component system, which detects and responds to divalent cations and antimicrobial peptides and can trigger bacterial virulence. Despite their ubiquity and importance in bacterial signaling, the structure and molecular mechanism of the sensor kinases is not fully understood. Frequently, signals are transmitted from a periplasmic domain in these proteins to the cytoplasmic kinase domains via an extended dimeric interface, and the PhoQ protein would appear to follow this paradigm. However, the isolated truncated periplasmic domain of PhoQ dimerizes poorly, so it has been difficult to distinguish the relevant interface in crystal structures of the PhoQ periplasmic domain. Thus, to determine the arrangement of the periplasmic domains of Escherichia coli PhoQ in the physiological homodimer, disulfide-scanning mutagenesis was used. Single cysteine substitutions were introduced along the N-terminal helix of the periplasmic region, and the degree of cross-linking in each protein variant was determined by Western blotting and immunodetection. The results were subjected to periodicity analysis to generate a profile that provides information concerning the Cβ distances between corresponding residues at the interface. This profile, together with a rigid-body search procedure, side-chain placement, and energy minimization, was used to build a model of the dimer arrangement. The final model proved to be highly compatible with one of the PhoQ crystal structures, 3BQ8, indicating that 3BQ8 is representative of the physiological arrangement. The model of the periplasmic region is also compatible with a full-length PhoQ protein in which a four-helix bundle forms in the membrane. The membrane four-helix bundle has been proposed for other sensor kinases and is thought to have a role in the mechanism of signal transduction; our model supports the idea that signaling through a membrane four-helix bundle is a widespread mechanism in the transmembrane sensor kinases.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283608004506
00222836