An scFv Intrabody against the Nonamyloid Component of α-Synuclein Reduces Intracellular Aggregation and Toxicity
23479764300,55245027000,7006121897
α-synuclein,nonamyloid component,engineered antibody,aggregation,Parkinson's disease
Prevention of abnormal misfolding and aggregation of α synuclein (syn) protein in vulnerable neurons should be viable therapeutic strategies for reducing pathogenesis in Parkinson's disease. The nonamyloid component (NAC) region of α-syn shows strong tendencies to form β-sheet structures, and deletion of this region has been shown to reduce aggregation and toxicity in vitro and in vivo. The binding of a molecular species to this region may mimic the effects of such deletions. Single-chain variable fragment (scFv) antibodies retain the binding specificity of antibodies and, when genetically manipulated to create high-diversity libraries, allow in vitro selection against peptides. Accordingly, we used a yeast surface display library of an entire naïve repertoire of human scFv antibodies to select for binding to a NAC peptide. Candidate scFv antibodies (after transfer to mammalian expression vectors) were screened for viability in a neuronal cell line by transient cotransfection with A53T mutant α-syn. This provided a ranking of the protective efficacies of the initial panel of intracellular antibodies (intrabodies). High steady-state expression levels and apparent conformational epitope binding appeared more important than in vitro affinity in these assays. None of the scFv antibodies selected matched the sequences of previously reported anti-α-syn scFv antibodies. A stable cell line expressing the most effective intrabody, NAC32, showed highly significant reductions in abnormal aggregation in two separate models. Recently, intrabodies have shown promising antiaggregation and neuroprotective effects against misfolded mutant huntingtin protein. The NAC32 study extends such work significantly by utilizing information about the pathogenic capacity of a specific α-syn region to offer a new generation of in vitro-derived antibody fragments, both for further engineering as direct therapeutics and as a tool for rational drug design for Parkinson's disease.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283607015975
00222836