The Kinetic Pathway of Folding of Barnase
24522631600,7201692554,7004325138,36043863300
intermediates,protein,folding,NMR,mechanism
To search for folding intermediates, we have examined the folding and unfolding kinetics of wild-type barnase and four representative mutants under a wide range of conditions that span two-state and multi-state kinetics. The choice of mutants and conditions provided in-built controls for artifacts that might distort the interpretation of kinetics, such as the non-linearity of kinetic and equilibrium data with concentration of denaturant. We measured unfolding rate constants over a complete range of denaturant concentration by using by 1H/2H-exchange kinetics under conditions that favour folding, conventional stopped-flow methods at higher denaturant concentrations and continuous flow. Under conditions that favour multi-state kinetics, plots of the rate constants for unfolding against denaturant concentration fitted quantitatively to the equation for three-state kinetics, with a sigmoid component for a change of rate determining step, as did the refolding kinetics. The position of the transition state on the reaction pathway, as measured by solvent exposure (the Tanford β value) also moved with denaturant concentration, fitting quantitatively to the same equations with a change of rate determining step. The sigmoid behaviour disappeared under conditions that favoured two-state kinetics. Those data combined with direct structural observations and simulation support a minimal reaction pathway for the folding of barnase that involves two detectable folding intermediates. The first intermediate, I1, is the denatured state under physiological conditions, DPhys, which has native-like topology, is lower in energy than the random-flight denatured state U and is suggested by molecular dynamics simulation of unfolding to be on-pathway. The second intermediate, I2, is high energy, and is proven by the change in rate determining step in the unfolding kinetics to be on-pathway. The change in rate determining step in unfolding with structure or environment reflects the change in partitioning of this intermediate to products or starting materials.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283603010349
00222836