DsbA and DsbC-catalyzed Oxidative Folding of Proteins with Complex Disulfide Bridge Patterns In Vitro and In Vivo
7003955988,6602235815,7006463850
oxidative protein folding,Ragi bifunctional inhibitor,disulfide exchange reactions,in vivo folding,disulfide isomerases
Oxidative protein folding in the periplasm of Escherichia coli is catalyzed by the thiol-disulfide oxidoreductases DsbA and DsbC. We investigated the catalytic efficiency of these enzymes during folding of proteins with a very complex disulfide pattern in vivo and in vitro, using the Ragi bifunctional inhibitor (RBI) as model substrate. RBI is a 13.1kDa protein with five overlapping disulfide bonds. We show that reduced RBI can be refolded quantitatively in glutathione redox buffers in vitro and spontaneously adopts the single correct conformation out of 750 possible species with five disulfide bonds. Under oxidizing redox conditions, however, RBI folding is hampered by accumulation of a large number of intermediates with non-native disulfide bonds, while a surprisingly low number of intermediates accumulates under optimal or reducing redox conditions. DsbC catalyzes folding of RBI under all redox conditions in vitro, but is particularly efficient in rearranging buried, non-native disulfide bonds formed under oxidizing conditions. In contrast, the influence of DsbA on the refolding reaction is essentially restricted to reducing redox conditions where disulfide formation is rate limiting. The effects of DsbA and DsbC on folding of RBI in E.coli are very similar to those observed in vitro. Whereas overexpression of DsbA has no effect on the amount of correctly folded RBI, co-expression of DsbC enhanced the efficiency of RBI folding in the periplasm of E.coli about 14-fold. Addition of reduced glutathione to the growth medium together with DsbC overexpression further increased the folding yield of RBI in vivo to 26-fold. This shows that DsbC is the bacterial enzyme of choice for improving the periplasmic folding yields of proteins with very complex disulfide bond patterns.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283602012482
00222836