Nucleotide Dependent Monomer/Dimer Equilibrium of OpuAA, the Nucleotide-binding Protein of the Osmotically Regulated ABC Transporter OpuA from Bacillus subtilis
26643165400,7006164594,35312368200
ABC transporter,nucleotide-binding protein,ATPase,monomer/dimer equilibrium,TNP–ATP
The OpuA system of Bacillus subtilis is a member of the substrate-binding-protein-dependent ABC transporter superfamily and serves for the uptake of the compatible solute glycine betaine under hyperosmotic growth conditions. Here, we have characterized the nucleotide-binding protein (OpuAA) of the B.subtilis OpuA transporter in vitro. OpuAA was overexpressed heterologously in Escherichia coli as a hexahistidine tag fusion protein and purified to homogeneity by affinity and size exclusion chromatography (SEC). Dynamic monomer/dimer equilibrium was observed for OpuAA, and the KD value was determined to be 6 μM. Under high ionic strength assay conditions, the monomer/dimer interconversion was diminished, which enabled separation of both species by SEC and separate analysis of both monomeric and dimeric OpuAA. In the presence of 1 M NaCl, monomeric OpuAA showed a basal ATPase activity (KM=0.45 mM; k2=2.3 min−1), whereas dimeric OpuAA showed little ATPase activity under this condition. The addition of nucleotides influenced the monomer/dimer ratio of OpuAA, demonstrating different oligomeric states during its catalytic cycle. The monomer was the preferred species under post-hydrolysis conditions (e.g. ADP/Mg2+), whereas the dimer dominated the nucleotide-free and ATP-bound states. The affinity and stoichiometry of monomeric or dimeric OpuAA/ATP complexes were determined by means of the fluorescent ATP-analog TNP–ATP. One molecule of TNP–ATP was bound in the monomeric state and two TNP–ATP molecules were detected in the dimeric state of OpuAA. Binding of TNP–ADP/Mg2+ to dimeric OpuAA induced a conformational change that led to the decay of the dimer. On the basis of our data, we propose a model that couples changes in the oligomeric state of OpuAA with ATP hydrolysis.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283603012592
00222836