Quantitative Analysis of Aspartate Receptor Signaling Complex Reveals that the Homogeneous Two-state Model is Inadequate: Development of a Heterogeneous Two-state Model
57191336876,7004409485
bacterial chemotaxis,receptor adaptation,covalent modification,CheA,two-state model
The two-state model of receptor activation, in which a receptor population exists in equilibrium between a single on-state and a single off-state, has long been considered a viable model for the signaling behavior of bacterial chemoreceptors. Here, we show that this simple, homogeneous two-state model is adequate for a pure receptor population with just one adaptation state, but fails to account quantitatively for the observed linear relationship between the apparent attractant affinity (K1/2) and kinase activity (Vobsapo) as the adaptation state is varied. Further analysis reveals that the available data are instead consistent with a heterogeneous two-state model in which covalent modification of receptor adaptation sites changes the microscopic properties of the on-state or off-state. In such a system, each receptor molecule retains a single on-state and off-state, but covalent adaptation generates a heterogeneous population of receptors exhibiting a range of different on-states or off-states with different microscopic parameters and conformations. It follows that covalent adaptation transforms the receptor from a simple, two-state toggle switch into a variable switch. In order to identify the microscopic parameters most sensitive to covalent adaptation, six modified, two-state models were examined in which covalent adaptation alters a different microscopic parameter. The analysis suggests that covalent adaptation primarily alters the ligand-binding affinity of the receptor off-state (KD1). By contrast, models in which covalent adaptation alters the ligand-binding affinity of the receptor on-state, the maximal kinase stimulation of the on-state or off-state, cooperative interactions between receptors, or the assembly of the receptor-kinase signaling complex are inconsistent with the available evidence. Overall, the findings support a heterogeneous two-state model in which modification of the receptor adaptation sites generates a population of receptors with heterogeneous off-states differing in their attractant affinities.In the process of testing the effects of covalent adaptation on the assembly of the receptor-kinase signaling complex, a new method for estimating the stoichiometric ratio of receptor and CheA in the ternary signaling complex was devised. This method suggests that the ratio of receptor dimers to CheA dimers in the assembled complex is 6:1 or less.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283603000263
00222836