Using Multiconformation Continuum Electrostatics to Compare Chloride Binding Motifs in α-Amylase, Human Serum Albumin, and Omp32
55494062000,7003434099
continuum electrostatics,ion binding,amylase,serum albumin,anion channels
Ions are a ubiquitous component of the cellular environment, transferring into cells through membrane-embedded proteins. Ions bind to proteins to regulate their charge and function. Here, using multiconformation continuum electrostatics (MCCE), we show that the changes of chloride binding to α-amylase, human serum albumin (HSA) and Omp32 with pH, and of α-amylase with mutation agree well with experimental data. The three proteins represent three different types of binding. In α-amylase, chloride is bound in a specific buried site. Chloride binding is strongly coupled to the protonation state of a nearby lysine. MCCE calculates an 11-fold change in chloride affinity between the wild-type α-amylase and the K300R mutant, in good agreement with the measured 10-fold change. Without considering the coupled protonation reaction, the calculated affinity change would be more than 106-fold. In HSA, chlorides are distributed on the protein surface. Although HSA has a negative net charge, it binds more anions than cations. There are no highly occupied binding sites in HSA. Rather, there are many partially occupied sites near clusters of basic residues. The relative affinity of bound ions of different charges is shown to depend on the distribution of charged residues on the surface rather than the overall net charge of the protein. The calculated strong pH dependence of the number of chlorides bound and the anion selectivity agree with those of previous experiments. In Omp32, chlorides are stabilized in an anion-selective transmembrane channel in a pH-independent manner. The positive electrostatic potential in Omp32 results in about two chlorides and no cations bound in the transmembrane region of this anion-selective channel. The studies here show that with the ability to sample multiple binding sites and coupled protein protonation states, MCCE provides a powerful tool to analyze and predict ion binding. The calculations overestimate the affinity of surface chloride in HSA and Omp32 relative to the buried ion in amylase. Differences between ion–solvent interactions for buried and surface ions will be discussed.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283609000825
00222836