Comparative Multiplexed Mass Spectrometric Analyses of Endogenously Expressed Yeast Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Exosomes
8555315300,8542382800,6602675695,35279863900
yeast exosome,tandem affinity purification,macromolecular mass spectrometry,quantitative mass spectrometry,phosphorylation
Here we combined tandem affinity purification with several mass-spectrometry-based approaches to gain more insight into the composition and structure of the yeast nuclear–cytoplasmic exosome protein complex. The yeast exosome fulfills several different functions in RNA metabolism and can be localized in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus. These two exosome complexes differ in protein composition, although they share several constituents. We focused on these differences in composition by selecting a nuclear-specific exosome protein (Rrp6) and a cytoplasmic-specific protein (Ski7) as the tandem-affinity-purification-tagged affinity bait protein. First, we investigated both these purified exosome assemblies by macromolecular mass spectrometry (MS) to determine the stability and mass of the intact protein complexes and to obtain information on composition and core constituents. We used tandem MS on these intact protein complexes to further probe the composition and to obtain insight into the peripheral nature of some of the constituents. Finally, we combine stable isotope labeling with MS to quantitate differences in exosome composition and posttranslational modifications. We identified a few phosphorylation sites that are differentially regulated between the cytoplasmic exosome and the nuclear exosome. From all of these data, we conclude that the yeast nuclear exosome and the cytoplasmic exosome share a common stable core complex, but are decorated with quite a few differing peripheral proteins. We show that the nuclear exosome selectively copurifies with the α/β importin heterodimer, which is known to be involved in the transport of proteins across the nuclear membrane.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283608014307
00222836