Kinetics of Paused Ribosome Recycling in Escherichia coli
35074137900,7202656764
peptidyl-tRNA,release factor,ribosome pausing,tmRNA,translation termination
The bacterial tmRNA·SmpB system recycles stalled translation complexes in a process termed ‘ribosome rescue.’ tmRNA·SmpB specifically recognizes ribosomes that are paused at or near the 3′ end of truncated mRNA; therefore, nucleolytic mRNA processing is required before paused ribosomes can be rescued from full-length transcripts. Here, we examine the recycling of ribosomes paused on both full-length and truncated mRNAs. Peptidyl-tRNAs corresponding to each paused translation complex were identified, and their turnover kinetics was used to estimate the half-lives of paused ribosomes in vivo. Ribosomes were paused at stop codons on full-length mRNA using a nascent peptide motif that interferes with translation termination and elicits tmRNA·SmpB activity. Peptidyl-tRNA turnover from these termination-paused ribosomes was slightly more rapid in tmRNA+ cells (T1/2=22±2.2 s) than in ΔtmRNA cells (T1/2=32±1.6 s). Overexpression of release factor (RF) 1 greatly accelerated peptidyl-tRNA turnover from termination-paused ribosomes in both tmRNA+ and ΔtmRNA cells, whereas other termination factors had little or no effect on recycling. In contrast to inefficient translation termination, ribosome recycling from truncated transcripts lacking in-frame stop codons was dramatically accelerated by tmRNA·SmpB. However, peptidyl-tRNA still turned over from nonstop-paused ribosomes at a significant rate (t1/2=61±7.3 s) in ΔtmRNA cells. Overexpression of RF-1, RF-3, and ribosome recycling factor in ΔtmRNA cells failed to accelerate ribosome recycling from nonstop mRNA. These results indicate that tmRNA·SmpB activity is rate limited by mRNA cleavage, and that RF-3 and ribosome recycling factor do not constitute a tmRNA-independent rescue pathway, as previously suggested. Peptidyl-tRNA turnover from nonstop-paused ribosomes in ΔtmRNA cells suggests the existence of another uncharacterized ribosome rescue pathway.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283609011371
00222836