Recognition of Non-α-amino Substrates by Pyrrolysyl-tRNA Synthetase
7408548476,23986929100,35378273400,36037012700
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase,pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase,genetic code expansion,ester bond,α-hydroxyacid
Pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase (PylRS), an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (aaRS) recently found in some methanogenic archaea and bacteria, recognizes an unusually large lysine derivative, l-pyrrolysine, as the substrate, and attaches it to the cognate tRNA (tRNAPyl). The PylRS–tRNAPyl pair interacts with none of the endogenous aaRS–tRNA pairs in Escherichia coli, and thus can be used as a novel aaRS–tRNA pair for genetic code expansion. The crystal structures of the Methanosarcina mazei PylRS revealed that it has a unique, large pocket for amino acid binding, and the wild type M. mazei PylRS recognizes the natural lysine derivative as well as many lysine analogs, including Nɛ-(tert-butoxycarbonyl)-l-lysine (Boc-lysine), with diverse side chain sizes and structures. Moreover, the PylRS only loosely recognizes the α-amino group of the substrate, whereas most aaRSs, including the structurally and genetically related phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase (PheRS), strictly recognize the main chain groups of the substrate. We report here that wild type PylRS can recognize substrates with a variety of main-chain α-groups: α-hydroxyacid, non-α-amino-carboxylic acid, Nα-methyl-amino acid, and d-amino acid, each with the same side chain as that of Boc-lysine. In contrast, PheRS recognizes none of these amino acid analogs. By expressing the wild type PylRS and its cognate tRNAPyl in E. coli in the presence of the α-hydroxyacid analog of Boc-lysine (Boc-LysOH), the amber codon (UAG) was recoded successfully as Boc-LysOH, and thus an ester bond was site-specifically incorporated into a protein molecule. This PylRS–tRNAPyl pair is expected to expand the backbone diversity of protein molecules produced by both in vivo and in vitro ribosomal translation.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283608014988
00222836