Characterization of the Heterogeneity and Specificity of Interpolypeptide Interactions in Amyloid Protofibrils by Measurement of Site-Specific Fluorescence Anisotropy Decay Kinetics
35195864600,35563592100,34875129000
barstar,amyloid protofibrils,time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy decay,two-population anisotropy decay,interpeptide interactions
The aggregation of proteins often results in highly ordered fibrillar structures. While significant insights have been obtained on structural aspects of amyloid fibrils, little is known about the structures of protofibrils, which are presumed to be the precursors of fibrils. An understanding of the molecular mechanism of the formation of protofibrils and fibrils requires information on the landscape of interpeptide interactions. This work addresses this question by using, as a model protein, barstar, which forms protofibrils and fibrils at low (&lt;3) pH. Use was made of the heterogeneity of aggregate populations encountered during fibril formation. Population heterogeneity was scored through rotational dynamics monitored by time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy of an environment-sensitive fluorophore, 5-((((2-iodoacetyl)amino)ethyl)amino)naphthalene-1-sulfonic acid (1,5-IAEDANS), attached to specific locations in the protein. Firstly, it was observed that barstar, when labeled at certain locations with 1,5-IAEDANS, did not form mixed protofibrils with the corresponding unlabeled protein. Labeled and unlabeled proteins formed protofibrils as separate populations. A two-population model of fluorescence anisotropy decay kinetics exhibiting a ‘dip-and-rise’ behavior was the main readout in arriving at this conclusion. Additional support for this conclusion came from the fluorescence lifetime of the probe 1,5-IAEDANS. Subsequently, the location of the fluorophore was moved along the length of the protein in nine mutant proteins, and the capability to form mixed fibrils was assessed. The results revealed that about two-thirds of the protein sequence at the C-terminal end of the protein was intimately involved in the formation of ordered protofibrils, probably forming the core, while the remaining one-third of the protein (i.e., the N-terminal region) remained largely noninteractive and flexible. This methodology can be used as a general strategy to identify regions of a given protein sequence involved in interprotein interactions in amyloid protofibrils.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283609010419
00222836