The Role of DNA Structure and Dynamics in the Recognition of Bovine Papillomavirus E2 Protein Target Sequences
6508200652,56632024100,7201381315
E2-BS,BPV-1-E2,BI and BII phosphate groups,specific recognition,molecular dynamics simulation
The papillomavirus E2 transcription and replication factors bind to the DNA consensus ACCGN4CGGT sequence (E2-BS), through both direct and indirect readout mechanisms. The two symmetric half-sites ACCG·CGGT are highly conserved in the genomes and are hydrogen bound with E2. Although E2 does not contact the N4 spacer, the affinities are modulated by the base composition of this DNA part. Nevertheless, the origin of either the global recognition mechanism or the spacer effect remains unclear, particularly in the case of the bovine papillomavirus type 1 E2 (BPV-1-E2) system, used as model to study the papillomaviruses. We present, herein, studies carried out on oligomers differently recognized by the BPV-1-E2 protein and based on molecular dynamic simulations including counterions and water. The sequences contain the conserved half-sites but three different spacers (CCAT, ACGT and AAAC), resulting in very high, high and low affinity targets for BPV-1-E2. In order to estimate how much the free DNAs resemble the bound conformations, comparisons are made with two DNAs extracted from E2-BS-BPV-1 crystallographic complexes, representative of high and moderate affinity structures. The analysis of 15ns trajectories reveals that the ACCG/CGGT half-sites, whatever the spacer, have the same behavior and adopt average stable base-pair parameters very close to those of the bound conformations. In contrast, the three different free spacers strongly differ in their BI↔BII backbone dynamics. The low affinity AAAC spacer exhibits stable BI backbone conformations, the high affinity ACGT spacer is characterized by a dramatic instability of the CpG phosphate groups, and the CpA and GpG backbones in the very high affinity CCAT·ATGG spacer are trapped in BII conformations. All resemble more of the moderate affinity complex DNA than the high affinity one. Nevertheless, the particular behavior of the CCAT and ACGT backbones allows the emergence of BII-rich spacers, a configuration reproducing both local and global helical features of the bound DNA conformation of the high affinity complex and favoring the minor groove curvature required in the complex. In particular, the CCAT-containing site spends almost half of the time in this form that well mimics the bound one. Thus, we propose that the E2 protein could take advantage of the invariant favorable structures of the half-sites to form a pre-complex, but would require a specific spacer intrinsic malleability to lock the interaction. Finally, the backbone conformational states, by their ability to translate information coded in the sequence into structural properties, provide insight into the mechanisms that contribute to fine binding site selection and specific nucleic acid ligand recognition.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002228360400405X
00222836