Terbium-mediated Footprinting Probes a Catalytic Conformational Switch in the Antigenomic Hepatitis Delta Virus Ribozyme
15055831000,7005748337,7005323232
catalytic RNA folding,melting curve,metal ion binding site,reaction mechanism,terbium luminescence
The two forms of the hepatitis delta virus ribozyme are derived from the genomic and antigenomic RNA strands of the human hepatitis delta virus (HDV), where they serve a crucial role in pathogen replication by catalyzing site-specific self-cleavage reactions. The HDV ribozyme requires divalent metal ions for formation of its tertiary structure, consisting of a tight double-nested pseudoknot, and for efficient self- (or cis-) cleavage. Comparison of recently solved crystal structures of the cleavage precursor and 3′ product indicates that a significant conformational switch is required for catalysis by the genomic HDV ribozyme. Here, we have used the lanthanide metal ion terbium(III) to footprint the precursor and product solution structures of the cis-acting antigenomic HDV ribozyme. Inhibitory Tb3+ binds with high affinity to similar sites on RNA as Mg2+ and subsequently promotes slow backbone scission. We find subtle, yet significant differences in the terbium(III) footprinting pattern between the precursor and product forms of the antigenomic HDV ribozyme, consistent with differences in conformation as observed in the crystal structures of the genomic ribozyme. In addition, UV melting profiles provide evidence for a less tight tertiary structure in the precursor. In both the precursor and product we observe high-affinity terbium(III) binding sites in joining sequence J4/2 (Tb1/2≈4 μM) and loop L3, which are key structural components forming the catalytic core of the HDV ribozyme, as well as in several single-stranded regions such as J1/2 and the L4 tetraloop (Tb1/2≈50 μM). Sensitized luminescence spectroscopy confirms that there are at least two affinity classes of Tb3+ binding sites. Our results thus demonstrate that a significant conformational change accompanies catalysis in the antigenomic HDV ribozyme in solution, similar to the catalytic conformational switch observed in crystals of the genomic form, and that structural and perhaps catalytic metal ions bind close to the catalytic core.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283604006783
00222836