Helix Packing Moments Reveal Diversity and Conservation in Membrane Protein Structure
36078432200,7006695426,7403524382,7406653872
helix packing,membrane protein,GPCR,hydrophobic moment,membrane channel and transporter
Helical membrane proteins are more tightly packed and the packing interactions are more diverse than those found in helical soluble proteins. Based on a linear correlation between amino acid packing values and interhelical propensity, we propose the concept of a helix packing moment to predict the orientation of helices in helical membrane proteins and membrane protein complexes. We show that the helix packing moment correlates with the helix interfaces of helix dimers of single pass membrane proteins of known structure. Helix packing moments are also shown to help identify the packing interfaces in membrane proteins with multiple transmembrane helices, where a single helix can have multiple contact surfaces. Analyses are described on class A G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) with seven transmembrane helices. We show that the helix packing moments are conserved across the class A family of GPCRs and correspond to key structural contacts in rhodopsin. These contacts are distinct from the highly conserved signature motifs of GPCRs and have not previously been recognized. The specific amino acid types involved in these contacts, however, are not necessarily conserved between subfamilies of GPCRs, indicating that the same protein architecture can be supported by a diverse set of interactions. In GPCRs, as well as membrane channels and transporters, amino acid residues with small side-chains (Gly, Ala, Ser, Cys) allow tight helix packing by mediating strong van der Waals interactions between helices. Closely packed helices, in turn, facilitate interhelical hydrogen bonding of both weakly polar (Ser, Thr, Cys) and strongly polar (Asn, Gln, Glu, Asp, His, Arg, Lys) amino acid residues. We propose the use of the helix packing moment as a complementary tool to the helical hydrophobic moment in the analysis of transmembrane sequences.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283604001457
00222836