Molecular Determinants for ATP-binding in Proteins: A Data Mining and Quantum Chemical Analysis
7202629590,7601521804,35956270100,7404709560
ATP-binding proteins,intermolecular interactions,hydrogen bonds,cation–π interactions,π–π stacking interactions
Adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP) plays an essential role in all forms of life. Molecular recognition of ATP in proteins is a subject of great importance for understanding enzymatic mechanism and for drug design. We have carried out a large-scale data mining of the Protein Data Bank (PDB) to analyze molecular determinants for recognition of the adenine moiety of ATP by proteins. Non-bonded intermolecular interactions (hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking interactions, and cation–π interactions) between adenine base and surrounding residues in its binding pockets are systematically analyzed for 68 non-redundant, high-resolution crystal structures of adenylate-binding proteins. In addition to confirming the importance of the widely known hydrogen bonding, we found out that cation–π interactions between adenine base and positively charged residues (Lys and Arg) and π–π stacking interactions between adenine base and surrounding aromatic residues (Phe, Tyr, Trp) are also crucial for adenine binding in proteins. On average, there exist 2.7 hydrogen bonding interactions, 1.0 π–π stacking interactions, and 0.8 cation–π interactions in each adenylate-binding protein complex. Furthermore, a high-level quantum chemical analysis was performed to analyze contributions of each of the three forms of intermolecular interactions (i.e. hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking interactions, and cation–π interactions) to the overall binding force of the adenine moiety of ATP in proteins. Intermolecular interaction energies for representative configurations of intermolecular complexes were analyzed using the supermolecular approach at the MP2/6-311+G∗ level, which resulted in substantial interaction strengths for all the three forms of intermolecular interactions. This work represents a timely undertaking at a historical moment when a large number of X-ray crystallographic structures of proteins with bound ATP ligands have become available, and when high-level quantum chemical analysis of intermolecular interactions of large biomolecular systems becomes computationally feasible. The establishment of the molecular basis for recognition of the adenine moiety of ATP in proteins will directly impact molecular design of ATP-binding site targeted enzyme inhibitors such as kinase inhibitors.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283603015754
00222836