Symmetric K+ and Mg2+ Ion-binding Sites in the 5S rRNA Loop E Inferred from Molecular Dynamics Simulations
6701877113,6602673918,35240975500
X-ray crystallography,Brownian dynamics simulations,ion competition
Potassium binding to the 5S rRNA loop E motif has been studied by molecular dynamics at high (1.0 M) and low (0.2 M) concentration of added KCl in the presence and absence of Mg2+. A clear pattern of seven deep groove K+ binding sites or regions, in all cases connected with guanine N7/O6 atoms belonging to GpG, GpA, and GpU steps, was identified, indicating that the LE deep groove is significantly more ionophilic than the equivalent groove of regular RNA duplexes. Among all, two symmetry-related sites (with respect to the central G·A pair) were found to accommodate K+ ions with particularly long residence times. In a preceding molecular dynamics study by Auffinger et al. in the year 2003, these two sites were described as constituting important Mg2+ binding locations. Altogether, the data suggest that these symmetric sites correspond to the loop E main ion binding regions. Indeed, they are located in the deep groove of an important ribosomal protein binding motif associated with a fragile pattern of non-Watson–Crick pairs that has certainly to be stabilized by specific Mg2+ ions in order to be efficiently recognized by the protein. Besides, the other sites accommodate monovalent ions in a more diffuse way pointing out their lesser significance for the structure and function of this motif. Ion binding to the shallow groove and backbone atoms was generally found to be of minor importance since, at the low concentration, no well defined binding site could be characterized while high K+ concentration promoted mostly unspecific potassium binding to the RNA backbone. In addition, several K+ binding sites were located in positions equivalent to water molecules from the first hydration shell of divalent ions in simulations performed with magnesium, indicating that ion binding regions are able to accommodate both mono- and divalent ionic species. Overall, the simulations provide a more precise but, at the same time, a more intricate view of the relations of this motif with its ionic surrounding.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283603013172
00222836