Are Residues in a Protein Folding Nucleus Evolutionarily Conserved?
7202710879,35215765500
protein folding,folding nucleus,φ value,continuous time Markov process,ancestral folding nucleus
Protein is the working molecule of the cell, and evolution is the hallmark of life. It is important to understand how protein folding and evolution influence each other. Several studies correlating experimental measurement of residue participation in folding nucleus and sequence conservation have reached different conclusions. These studies are based on assessment of sequence conservation at folding nucleus sites using entropy or relative entropy measurement derived from multiple sequence alignment. Here we report analysis of conservation of folding nucleus using an evolutionary model alternative to entropy-based approaches. We employ a continuous time Markov model of codon substitution to distinguish mutation fixed by evolution and mutation fixed by chance. This model takes into account bias in codon frequency, bias-favoring transition over transversion, as well as explicit phylogenetic information. We measure selection pressure using the ratio ω of synonymous versus non-synonymous substitution at individual residue site. The ω-values are estimated using the PAML method, a maximum-likelihood estimator. Our results show that there is little correlation between the extent of kinetic participation in protein folding nucleus as measured by experimental φ-value and selection pressure as measured by ω-value. In addition, two randomization tests failed to show that folding nucleus residues are significantly more conserved than the whole protein, or the median ω value of all residues in the protein. These results suggest that at the level of codon substitution, there is no indication that folding nucleus residues are significantly more conserved than other residues. We further reconstruct candidate ancestral residues of the folding nucleus and suggest possible test tube mutation studies for testing folding behavior of ancient folding nucleus.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283603013895
00222836