Design of a Highly Reactive HDV Ribozyme Sequence Uncovers Facilitation of RNA Folding by Alternative Pairings and Physiological Ionic Strength
8772799500,6507169795,7006364103
hepatitis delta virus,folding guide,ribozyme,RNA folding,therapeutic
The hepatitis delta virus (HDV) ribozyme is a self-cleaving RNA that resides in the HDV genome and regulates its replication. The native fold of the ribozyme is complex, having two pseudoknots. Earlier work implicated four non-native pairings in slowing pseudoknot formation: Alt 1, Alt 2, Alt 3, and Alt P1. The goal of the present work was design of a kinetically simplified and maximally reactive construct for in vitro mechanistic and structural studies. The initial approach chosen was site-directed mutagenesis in which known alternative pairings were destabilized while leaving the catalytic core intact. Based on prior studies, the G11C/U27Δ double mutant was prepared. However, biphasic kinetics and antisense oligonucleotide response trends opposite those of the well-studied G11C mutant were observed suggesting that new alternative pairings with multiple registers, termed Alt X and Alt Y, had been created. Enzymatic structure mapping of oligonucleotide models supported this notion. This led to a model wherein Alt 2 and the phylogenetically conserved Alt 3 act as “folding guides”, facilitating folding of the major population of the RNA molecules by hindering formation of the Alt X and Alt Y registers. Attempts to eliminate the strongest of the Alt X pairings by rational design of a quadruple mutant only resulted in more complex kinetic behavior. In an effort to simultaneously destabilize multiple alternative pairings, studies were carried out on G11C/U27Δ in the presence of urea or increased monovalent ion concentration. Inclusion of physiological ionic strength allowed the goal of monophasic, fast-folding (kobs≈60 min−1) kinetics to be realized. To account for this, a model is developed wherein Na+, which destabilizes secondary and tertiary structures in the presence of Mg2+, facilitates native folding by destabilizing the multiple alternative secondary structures with a higher-order dependence.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283604006527
00222836